 

 

 

ONLINE SUMMER 2020 
BIOLOGY 1A03 CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY 
 
PROFESSOR 
Dr. Lovaye Kajiura 
McMaster University, Department of Biology 
(not available on campus during the Summer 2020 term) 
E-mail: kajiura@mcmaster.ca 
Virtual office hours: to be posted on the Avenue online learning platform. 
 
COURSE / LABORATORY COORDINATOR 
Dr. Sajeni Mahalingam 
McMaster University, Department of Biology 
(not available on campus during the Summer 2020 term) 
E-mail: bio1a03@mcmaster.ca 

 
COURSE DESCRIPTION   
Structure, molecular composition, and function in sub-cellular and cellular systems. 
 
Prerequisites  
Grade 12 Biology U or Biology 1P03 and registration in any Level 1 program in the Faculty of Science or any program above 
Level  1;  or  any  program  above  Level  1;  or  registration  in  Arts  &  Science  I,  Medical  Radiation  Sciences  I,  Chemical 
Engineering and Bioengineering, Electrical and Biomedical Engineering. Not open to students with credit or registration in 
ISCI 1A24.  
 
Corequisites 
WHMIS 1A00, BIOSAFE 1BS0 if not already completed. Both corequisites must be completed prior to the first lab. Students 
enrolled in Biology 1A03 must also register in WHMIS 1A00 and BIOSAFE 1BS0.  
All Biology 1A03 students must have completed the WHMIS 1A00 & BIOSAFE 1BS0 Safety Workshops to participate in the 
1A03 labs. These safety courses are being offered on Avenue. For information regarding the Safety Workshops, refer to 
their  listings  posted  on  Avenue  or  visit  the  Environmental  &  Occupational  Health  Support  Services  website 
eohss@mcmaster.ca 
 
BIOLOGY 1A03 COURSE GOALS & OBJECTIVES 
The Biology 1A03 course is designed for students who intend to specialize in Science programs and is required for many 
upper level courses in the Faculty of Science. Upon completion of Biology 1A03, students will be able to:    
 
       1. Effectively discuss the fundamental concepts and underlying processes related to cellular and molecular  
           biology. 
        
       2. Design and test laboratory experiments necessary for biological sciences. 
 
       3. Work independently and in collaboration with others to compile, analyze, interpret, and present scientific  
           data using oral, written, and online formats. 
 
The primary goal of the course is to prepare students academically for subsequent, specialized Biology courses and to 
ensure that students acquire skills essential for upper-level biology courses and biology-related fields of study. 

1 

 
 

 

 

 

IMPORTANT 
 
ACADEMIC PROPERTY STATEMENT 

NO part of the BIOLOGY 1A03 online lectures, lecture notes, online discussions, course-related information or 
resources may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without permission in writing by the Biology 1A03 
professor, Dr. Lovaye Kajiura. 
 
NO photos, visual media, voice recordings, Powerpoint slides, MP3 media or lecture-related information may be 
reproduced or communicated by any means. Usage of cameras or video / camera-capable cellphones, 
smartphones or digital wireless media are not permitted to be used during online lectures. 
 
Students who have access to authorized recorded lectures in a course may use these recordings only for 
personal study and should not reproduce, share or upload the recording to any publicly accessible web 
environment.  Similarly, notes, slides, evaluations and tests are for personal use only and must not be shared 
with others outside of the Biology 1A03 course. 
 

 
BIOLOGY 1A03 LECTURE CONTENT 
Refer to the 2020 Spring/Summer Session Undergraduate Course Timetable. 
Biology 1A03 is taught in an online format, meaning that you will learn the course content at your own pace and on your 
own time through online visually rich web modules and instructional podcasts. The online modules will be released 
weekly. The instructional podcasts will also include online review lectures and applied lectures. Online review lectures will 
give you the opportunity to clarify concepts that you may have found challenging. Online applied lectures will be used to 
explore applied contexts with examples from innovative research and data analytics. Online review and applied lecture 
podcasts will be available weekly on Wednesdays (up to 3 hours in duration). Given the current situation, the online 
lectures will be presented asynchronously (pre-recorded) to provide greater flexibility in learning for students living in 
different time zones and those students with varied work schedules. 
 
The Biology 1A03 review and applied lectures will be a synthesis of several sources of information. Please note that 
students are expected to study all lecture materials. Students will benefit the most by including their own detailed written 
or typed notes into the provided Biology 1A03 lecture resources and slides posted with the online lecture podcasts. 
 

Date 
WEEK 1 June 24th 
WEEK 2 July 1st 
WEEK 3 July 8th 
WEEK 4 July 15th 
WEEK 5 July 22nd  
WEEK 6 July 29th 
WEEK 7 August 5th 

BIOLOGY 1A03 Themes 
Welcome to BIO 1A03 Orientation & Introduction Lecture   
Theme 1 The Structure of the Cell   
Theme 2 From Gene to Protein  
TEST #1 and Theme 3 Responding to the Environment 
Theme 4 DNA Replication & Mitosis 
Theme 5 The Principles of Inheritance 
TEST #2 

 
BIOLOGY 1A03 LABS 
Labs are scheduled on Wednesdays from 1:00 pm - 3:00 pm and 3:00 pm – 5:00 pm. Please check your Mosaic 
schedule for your lab section and scheduled lab time. 
   
Biology 1A03 labs will be completed at home. The lab manual will be posted on Avenue. You will complete the labs live 
online with your TA and students who are enrolled in your lab section. Some of the labs are virtual labs, but there are two 
hands on labs (Labs 2 and 3) that will be completed with materials that will be provided to you in an at-home lab kit that 
will be mailed to your summer mailing address. The hands-on labs can only be completed with your TAs supervision 
online. Labs will also include pre-lab quizzes, online instructional videos, and sample data sets that will be used during the 
completion of the post-lab reports. One of the laboratory exercises will require the completion of a formal lab report. All 
pre-lab quizzes, post-lab reports, and the formal lab report will be completed individually and submitted electronically via 
Avenue to Learn.  

2 

 
The BIO1A03 labs provide students with the opportunity to develop and practice their applied and hands-on lab skills 
through a unique and personalized question.  This project-based lab will have students work on a single question over the 
span of the semester.  Over the course of the semester, students will conduct experiments that allow them to develop the 
following skills: 
 
·      Obtain an introduction to microscopy and image analysis 
·      Create biological drawings of cells with appropriate labels and scale 
·      Understand pipetting and dilutions (with accompanying calculations) 
·      Determine concentrations using spectrophotometry or colourimetric analysis 
·      Understand a research question and create their own hypotheses based on the research question 
·      Understand the process of research ethics and approval 
·      Understanding DNA extractions and PCR reactions 
·      Determining size of DNA fragments and make inferences of DNA copy number 
·      Create graphs for data and carry out statistical analyses 

 

Week of 
June 22 

June 29 
July 6 

July 13 

July 20 
July 27 

Lab # and Topic 
Read – “The Lab Components in Biology 1A03”. Complete WHMIS 1A00 and BIOSAFE 1BS0. 
Lab 1 – Skills Lab: Micropipette, Microscope and Standard Curve   

Canada Day – no labs 
Lab 2A – Lab Introduction, Research Ethics, Evolution of Human Amylase Paper and unboxing of 
lab kit 
Lab 2B – In vitro Cheek cell staining with Foldscope kit 
Lab 3A – Amylase Assay and Determination of “unknown” Amylase Concentration using kit 
Lab 3B – Creating an Amylase Standard Curve 
Lab 4 – Exploring DNA Extraction, Polymerase Chain Reaction and Gel Electrophoresis 
Lab 5 – Evaluating Gene Duplication and Data Analysis 

 
All Biology 1A03 students must have completed the WHMIS 1A00 & BIOSAFE 1BS0 Safety Workshops to participate in 
the BIO1A03 at-home labs.  All students are required to provide proof of completion of WHMIS 1A00 and BIOSAFE 
1BS0 which must be uploaded to Avenue to Learn prior to opening your Biology 1A03 laboratory kit and prior to 
the first hands-on lab.  Prior to participating in the at-home labs, students will also be asked to complete and sign 
an assumption of risks form. 

We are only able to ship at-home lab kits to mailing addresses within Canada. If you do not have a Canadian 
mailing address for the kit to be shipped to, please contact us at bio1a03@mcmaster.ca by June 4 to discuss 
alternative options for the course. 

EXEMPTION FROM THE LAB COMPONENT 
Students with previous lab credit in Biology 1A03 may apply for an exemption from the lab component in Biology 1A03. 
Note that exemptions are NOT automatic. Forms to apply for the exemption are available from the Course Coordinator, 
Dr. Mahalingam. Forms must be submitted to Dr. Mahalingam by Monday, June 29. 
If the exemption is not approved, students must complete ALL the Summer 2020 Biology 1A03 lab requirements.  
 
REQUIRED BIOLOGY 1A03 TEXTBOOK 
BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS, 3rd Edition, by Morris, Hartl, Knoll, Lue, & Michael. 
BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS, 3rd Edition can be purchased online from the McMaster Campus Store 
(https://campusstore.mcmaster.ca/) via one of the following purchase options: 
 
Electronic purchase option 
Launchpad and the BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS, 3rd Edition textbook 
This purchase option includes electronic access to Launchpad and the BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS, 3rd Edition textbook. 
Instructions for Launchpad registration are posted on Avenue to Learn. The BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS, 3rd Edition 
textbook is contained within Launchpad. You cannot purchase electronic access to Launchpad and BIOLOGY HOW LIFE 
WORKS, 3rd Edition separately. 
 
Softcover textbook purchase option (limited quantity, check https://campusstore.mcmaster.ca/) 

 

3 

 
This purchase option includes a softcover copy of the BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS, 3rd Edition textbook, chapters 1 – 
24 only, and electronic access to Launchpad. Electronic access to Launchpad contains electronic access to the entire 
BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS, 3rd Edition textbook (chapters 1 – 48). 
Free shipping of this purchase option is available from The Campus Store. Enter promo code TEXTFREESHIP to obtain 
free shipping. 
 
ASSIGNED TEXTBOOK READING LIST 
Refer to the Biology 1A03 AVENUE course website for the softcover textbook and e-book reading lists. Refer to the 
reading list that matches the textbook option that you have purchased. 
 
BIOLOGY 1A03 HOW LIFE WORKS ONLINE LAUNCHPAD 
The BIOLOGY HOW LIFE WORKS publishers have created an interactive website called LaunchPad. LaunchPad 
contains interactive videos, practice questions, external links, and many other additional resources. 
LaunchPad also contains a copy of the textbook in electronic form (eBook). LaunchPad and the eBook will be used to 
facilitate learning. 
 
BIOLOGY 1A03 LABORATORY MANUAL 
Students will be provided with a downloadable copy of the Summer 2020 Biology 1A03 Laboratory Manual on Avenue to 
Learn. This manual will include lab learning objectives, lab instructions and Safety Data Sheets for all reagents used in the 
course labs. Separate Word Documents will be provided to all students to facilitate completion of the informal lab reports 
and assignments. 
 
ADDITIONAL REQUIRED LAB SUPPLIES   
At home lab kits as sent to your mailing address will include a lab coat, goggles, and gloves. Students will need to use 
tape to label their tubes, or a permanent marker.  Students will need to ensure they have access to a reliable internet 
connection during live lab sessions with their TA. 
 
AVENUE TO LEARN ONLINE LEARNING PLATFORM 
Note: In this course, we will be using Avenue to Learn for some assessments. Students should be aware that when they 
access electronic components of this course, private information such as first and last names, usernames for the 
McMaster email accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same course. The 
available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in this course will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure, please discuss this with the Course Coordinator.   
 
HOW TO LOG INTO THE BIOLOGY 1A03 AVENUE SITE    
1. Start your web browser and go to:  http://avenue.mcmaster.ca  
 
2. USER ID:   
 
    Type in the first part (in lower case letters) of your McMaster MUSS e-mail address (Your MAC ID).  
     
     For example:  if your McMaster e-mail address is janedoe@muss.cis.mcmaster.ca,  
                            then your Avenue User ID is janedoe. 
 
3. PASSWORD:  Type in your McMaster Modem / Printing / CIS Lab Access /Proxy Services password.  
 
4. Then click on the Login button. 
 
You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader (this is freeware) to read the Biology 1A03 pdf files.  
Most computers have Adobe Acrobat Reader installed as standard software.  
If your computer does not have it, you may download it from the Adobe website: 
http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html 
 
Note: In this course, we will be using Avenue for some assessments. Students should be aware that when they access 
the electronic components of this course, private information, including first and last names, usernames for the McMaster 
University e-mail accounts, and program affiliations may become apparent to others participating in the course. 
Continuation in this course will be deemed as consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about 
such disclosure, please discuss them with the professors and course coordinator of this course. 

 

4 

 
GRADING   Final Biology 1A03 grades will be determined using the following grading scheme: 
 

ITEM 

GRADING SCHEME  

PRE-LAB QUIZZES 
Throughout the term 
(6 quizzes x 1% each) 
INFORMAL LABS 
Throughout the term 
(7 informal reports x 1 % each) 
FORMAL LAB REPORT 
To be announced during the term 
(1 report) 

TEST #1 – ONLINE VIA AVENUE TO LEARN 
WEDNESDAY, JULY 15THTH, 9:00 AM 
Coverage - Theme 1 and Theme 2 Modules,  
Review Lectures, Applied Lectures, and Supplementary Information. 
Format - 30 multiple choice questions worth 30 marks  
& 15 marks worth of written answer questions 
Duration - 90 minutes 
TEST #2 – ONLINE VIA AVENUE TO LEARN 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 5TH, 9:00 AM 
Test #2 will evaluate content from Coverage - Theme 3, Theme 4, Theme 5 Modules,  
Review Lectures, Applied Lectures, and Supplementary Information-. 
Format - 40 multiple choice questions & 20 marks worth of written answer questions 
 Duration - 2 hours 

MAKE-UP TEST - ONLINE VIA AVENUE TO LEARN 
WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 5TH, 12:00 PM. 

A make-up test will be written by students who missed a Test 1 and obtained an 
approved MSAF following the test absence. The course content coverage and format 
of the make-up test will be the same as Test #1 on Wednesday, July 15th. 

6% 
 

7% 
 

12 % 
 

30% 

45% 
 

 

 
Final marks for the course are based on a total assessment of each student's record. It is a student's responsibility to make 
sure that his/her marks are complete and correct. Grade adjustment techniques may be used.  However, marks will NOT 
be  bell-curved  at  any  point  in  the  term.  The  Professor  and  Course  Coordinator  reserve  the  right  to  change  or  revise 
information contained in this course outline. The professor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course 
during the term. The university may change the dates and deadlines for any  or all courses in extreme circumstances.  If 
either  type  of  modification  becomes  necessary,  students  will  be  given  reasonable  notice  with  an  explanation  and  an 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and course websites 
daily  during  the  term  and  to  note  any  changes.  Marks  will  be  calculated  according  to  the  above  grading  scheme  to  be 
consistent with previous years. The Biology Department does not approve of altering marks arbitrarily at a student's request. 
 
BIOLOGY 1A03 TEST 1 & TEST 2 
 
The online Biology 1A03 Test 1 will be composed of 30 multiple choice questions (worth 30 marks) and 15 marks worth of 
written answer questions and will be 90 minutes in duration.  
 
The online Biology 1A03 Test 2 will be composed of 40 multiple choice questions and 20 marks worth of written answer 
questions and will be 2 hours in duration. 
 
Tests may include multiple choice, figures, graphs, and written factual, conceptual, and application style questions. 
 
This course may use proctoring software (to be determined) during tests/exams. This software may require you to turn on 
your video camera, present identification, monitor and record your computer activities, and lockdown your browser during 
the exam. This software may be required to be installed before the exam begins.  If you have questions about whether 
this software will be used, or concerns about the use of this software, please contact your Course Coordinator – Dr.Sajeni 
Mahalingam. 
 

 

5 

 
BIOLOGY 1A03 POLICIES    
1. The last day for enrollment and course changes during the Summer 2020 academic term is Monday, June 29, 2020. 
 
2. It is the requirement that students complete at least 75% of the course work to obtain credit for Biology 1A03,  
     including lab-related exercises, tests, and assignments. All students must write both Test 1 and Test 2.  
 
3. In order for a student to pass the course, students must pass the lab component of the course. It is also a  
    requirement of Biology 1A03 that students complete the majority of the lab exercises.  
 
    Because this course has a compulsory lab component, it is the responsibility of the university to ensure that  
    students have the appropriate academic and laboratory skills necessary to succeed in upper year biology  
    courses. If a student does not complete the majority of the lab component, the university reserves the right to  
    withhold a student’s grade until they have completed the required labs during a future semester. This policy  
    applies even if the student has notes from their Associate Dean of Studies office excusing him or her from the  
    missed labs, tests, or assignments.        

 
A lab exercise that is not submitted will result in a grade of zero unless the missed student work is supported by a 
MSAF or the student’s Associate Dean's (Studies) office. Documentation of the reason for the incomplete lab exercise 
will be required by the Associate Dean's office. It may be possible to submit a late lab assignment. Contact the Course 
Coordinator, Dr. Sajeni Mahalingam through email, bio1a03@mcmaster.ca to do so. 
 
Biology 1A03 requires the submission of one formal lab report during the term. If a student misses any one of the lab 
exercises, please email Dr. Sajeni Mahalingam for further directions as the student will still be required to write the 
formal lab report at the end of the term.  
 

    If a student is not able to complete one of the labs the student must complete the following two steps in order to prevent           
    a zero being assigned to the missed lab assignment grade. 
 
   Step 1 - The student will need to complete a MSAF (http://mcmaster.ca/msaf/) for the missed work.  
               
   Step 2 - Contact the Course Coordinator, Dr. Sajeni Mahalingam to ensure that MSAF confirmation email was received. 

   

4.  Students will be submitting their post-lab reports and their formal lab report to electronic dropboxes that will be  
     available within the Biology 1A03 AVENUE course site. Late submissions will be penalised 10% per day. 
 
5. All tests, lab reports, and assignments should be completed and submitted individually unless other instructions  
    to work in groups are specifically defined. All reports and assignments which are submitted should be unique. It  
    is considered academic dishonesty to submit work that was not originally yours or that has been previously  
    submitted. All cases of academic dishonesty will be dealt with through the office of Academic Integrity at  
    McMaster University. 
 
6. Sometimes a student may encounter a technical difficulty with the quizzes. Some of the common issues are  
    outlined (with solutions to them) in the Biology 1A03 Lab Information Document that is found on Avenue to Learn. If a               
    student needs help with other problems, the Course Coordinator can likely help, but only if the student contacts the    
    Course Coordinator before the quiz deadline. If the Course Coordinator does not know about the student’s technical       
    difficulty until after the due date has passed, there is nothing that the Course Coordinator can do to help the student. The  
    student will only be able to inform the Course Coordinator of technical difficulties during her online office hours (which do     
    not include evenings or weekends), so please plan to complete the quizzes well in advance of the due dates.  
 
7.  Any marked term work (labs, tests, etc.) may be submitted for re-grading within 5 business days of the work  
     being returned to the student. A regrade request can be accomplished by emailing the Course Coordinator- Dr. Sajeni  
     Mahalingham, and must be accompanied by a completed re-grade request form, which is available on the   
     Biology 1A03 Avenue site. The reason for the regrade request must be completely justified on the form.  
     Regrade requests made for frivolous reasons will be denied. Regrade forms and course work should be  
     submitted to the Course Coordinator via email. 
 
8.  Any term mark corrections must be made BEFORE the Biology 1A03 Test 2 is written. 
     Contact the Course Coordinator regarding tests/assignments grades corrections. There are not alternative  

 

6 

 
      assignments that can be completed by students for the purpose of increasing their final grade. 
  
9.   The professor, Course Coordinator, and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course  
      during the term. The university may change dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme  
      circumstances. If either type of modification becomes necessary, reasonable notice and communication with  
      the students will be given with explanation and the opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility  
      of the student to check their McMaster e-mail and course websites regularly (at least once per day) during  
      the term and take note of updates or changes. 
 
10. Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 
 
      For absences from classes lasting up to three calendar days: 

      Using the McMaster student absence form (MSAF) on-line, self-reporting tool, undergraduate 
      students may report absences lasting up to three calendar days and may also request relief for missed 
      academic work. The submission of medical or other types of supporting documentation is 
      normally not required. Students may use this tool to submit a maximum of one request for relief 
      of missed academic work per term. Students must immediately follow up with their course 
      instructors regarding the nature of the relief. Failure to do so may negate the opportunity for 
      relief. It is the prerogative of the instructor of the course to determine the appropriate relief for 
      missed term work in his/her course. 

     For absences from classes lasting more than three calendar days: 
     Students who are absent more than three days cannot use the on-line, self-reporting tool to request 
     relief. They MUST contact their Faculty Office to discuss their situation and may be required to 
     provide appropriate supporting documentation. If warranted, students will be approved to use a 
     discretionary version of the MSAF on-line, self-reporting tool. 

     For the reporting of more than one request per term: 
     Students who wish to submit more than one request for relief of missed academic work per term 
     cannot use the on-line, self-reporting tool to request relief. They MUST contact their Faculty 
     Office to discuss their situation and may be required to provide supporting documentation. If warranted,  
     students will be approved to use a discretionary version of the MSAF on-line, self-reporting tool. 
 
     For absences from classes lasting more than three calendar days or for the reporting of more than one 
     request for relief per term:  

 

 

 

 

If  the  reason  was  medical,  the  approved  McMaster  University  Medical  Form  covering  the  relevant  dates  must  be 
submitted. The student must be seen by a doctor at the earliest possible date, normally on or before the date of the 
missed work and the doctor must verify the duration of the illness. Relief will not be considered for minor illnesses. If the 
reason is non-medical, appropriate documentation with verifiable origin covering the relevant dates must be submitted, 
normally  within  five  working  days.  In  some  circumstances,  students  may  be  advised  to  submit  a  Petition  for  Special 
Consideration (Form A) seeking relief for missed academic work. In deciding whether or not to grant a petition, adequacy 
of the supporting documentation, including the timing in relation to the due date of the missed work and the degree of 
the  student's  incapacitation,  may  be  taken  into  account.  If  the  petition  is  approved  the  Faculty  Office  will  notify  the 
instructor(s)  recommending  relief.  The  student  must  contact  the  instructor  promptly  to  discuss  the  appropriate  relief. 
Failure to do so may negate the opportunity for relief. It is the prerogative of the instructor of the course to determine the 
appropriate relief for missed term work in his/her course. 

 
     The MSAF on-line, self-reporting tool cannot be used to apply for relief from any course work that is valued at   
     greater than 25% of the final grade, or any final examination or its equivalent. See Petitions for Special   
     Consideration in this section of the Calendar. Students should expect to have academic commitments Monday  
     through Saturday, but not on Sunday or statutory holidays. 
     Students who require accommodations to meet a religious obligation or to celebrate an important 
     religious holiday should make their requests within three weeks of the start of term to the Course Coordinator. 
      
      There will be no discretionary approvals given by the Coordinator or the Professor. 
 

 

 
7 

to  Learn  course  pages  are  considered  an  extension                                                            

BIOLOGY 1A03 MSAF POLICY  

Result 

Course component not completed (MSAF 
submitted) 
Lab quiz (each worth 1 % of final grade) 

Informal lab report (each worth 1% of final 
grade) 
Formal lab report (worth 12 % of final grade) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     As a student enrolled in this course you have been granted permission to access an online learning  

1% added to the value of the formal lab report, now 
13% of final grade. 
1% added to the value of formal lab report, now 13% 
of final grade. 
48 hour extension of deadline. The value of the 
formal lab report will not be added to the value of 
another course component.   
Students that miss test #1 for a valid reason and 
obtained an approved MSAF from the Office of the 
Associate Dean will complete an online make-up test 
on Wednesday, August 5. The course content 
coverage and format of the online make-up test will 
be the same as Test #1 on Wednesday, July 15th. 

MSAF submitted for Test 1 (30% of final grade) 

to  Learn.  Avenue 

management  system,  Avenue 
of the classroom and usage is provided as a privilege subject to the same code of conduct expected in a  lecture hall 
(see  relevant  section  of  the  student  code  of  conduct  below).  This  privilege  allows  participation  in  course  discussion 
forums and access to supplementary course materials. Please be advised that all areas of Avenue to Learn, including 
discussion forums, are owned and operated by McMaster University.  
 
Any content or communications deemed inappropriate by the course instructor or coordinator may be removed at their 
discretion.  Per  the  University  Technology  Services  Code  of  Conduct,  all  members  of  the  McMaster  community  are 
obligated to use computing resources in ways that are responsible, ethical and professional. Avenue to Learn Terms of 
Use are available at http://avenue.mcmaster.ca.  
 
Student Code of Conduct - Appendix D  
Major Offences include, but are not limited to: (h) engaging in disruptive behaviour. Disruptive behaviour is behaviour 
in class or out of class which involves substantial disorder and/or disrupts the operation of the University and (j) 
engaging in verbal or non-verbal behaviour or communication toward an individual or group which is considered to be 
intimidating, harassing and/or discriminatory. 

ONLINE COURSE BEHAVIOUR 
McMaster is committed to an inclusive and respectful community.  These principles and expectations extend to online 
activities including electronic chat groups, video calls and other learning platforms.  If you are concerned about your virtual 
classroom experiences, the Equity and Inclusion Office (EIO) is available to advise and assist students who may be 
experiencing any equity, accessibility, inclusion, harassment, discrimination or sexual violence concerns.  
 
You can reach the EIO at equity@mcmaster.ca. The Biology 1A03 Team thanks you in advance for joining us in ensuring 
that our McMaster online communities are spaces where no one feels excluded and everyone is able to enjoy learning 
together 
https://equity.mcmaster.ca/contact-us 
 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
Students are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials students earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. Academic dishonesty is to 
knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero 
on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned 
for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
The students are responsible to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. For information on 
the various types of academic dishonesty, please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 

8 

 

 

 
 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 
• Plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 
  obtained 
• Improper collaboration in group work 
• Copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations 
 
Any student who infringes one of these resolutions will be treated according to published policy. 
To deter acts of academic dishonesty in Biology 1A03, there will be multiple versions of tests & final exams.  
In addition, marked student course work will be randomly scanned and photocopied. 
 
By submitting this work, a student certifies that the work represents solely her/his own independent efforts. The students 
confirm that they are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process.  The 
student confirms that is her/his responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty under the Academic 
Integrity Policy.” 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/app/uploads/Academic-Integrity-Policy-1-1.pdf  
 
AUTHENTICITY / PLAGIARISM DETECTION 
Students who do not wish to submit their work through A2L and/or Turnitin.com must still submit an electronic and/or 
hardcopy to the instructor. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not 
submit work to Turnitin.com or Avenue to Learn. All submitted work is subject to normal verification that standards of 
academic integrity has been upheld (e.g. on-line search, other software, etc.). To see the Turnitin.com 
Policy, please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
Students who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) to make 
arrangements with a Program Coordinator.  Academic accommodations must be arranged for each term of 
study.  Student Accessibility Services can be contacted by phone 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or e-
mail sas@mcmaster.ca.  For further information, consult McMaster University’s Policy for Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities. http://www.mcmaster.ca/policy/Students-AcademicStudies/AcademicAccommodation-
StudentsWithDisabilities.pdf 
Students who are registered with SAS should meet with the Course Coordinator in order to discuss their academic 
accommodations. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMODATION FOR RELIGIOUS, INDIGENOUS, OR SPIRITUAL OBSERVANCES 
(RISO)Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should 
follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students requiring a RISO accommodation should submit their request 
to their Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for 
accommodation or to the Registrar’s Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as 
soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
 
McMASTER UNIVERSITY GRADING SCHEME 
Grades obtained for Biology 1A03 will be converted according to the following scheme, which is the one in general use at 
McMaster University. 
90 - 100%  A  +, 
A,  
85 - 89%     
A-, 
80 - 84%     
B+, 
77 - 79%     
B, 
73 - 76%     
B-, 
70 - 72%     
C+, 
67 - 69%     
C, 
63 - 66%     
C-, 
60 - 62%     
D+, 
57 - 59%     
D, 
53 - 56%     
D-, 
50 - 52%     
0 - 49%       
F, 
 

12 
11 
10 
 9 
 8 
 7 
 6 
 5 
 4 
 3 
 2 
 1 
 0 

 

9 

 
THE BIOLOGY ACHIEVEMENT AWARD 
The Department of Biology recognizes the importance of superior undergraduate academic performance in Biology 1A03 
among our students. Biology Academic Achievement Awards are conferred to Science I students, who obtain the highest 
standings in Biology 1A03. No applications are necessary as the awards are based solely on course grades. 
 
STUDY SKILLS 
The academic transition from high school to university is often very challenging for many students. For students who wish 
to improve their academic skills, study habits, time management, or for students who require specialized services 
[learning challenged students and ESL (English as a second language students)], assistance is available at both the 
Student Success Centre located in Gilmour Hall 110 https://studentsuccess.mcmaster.ca/ and the Student Accessibility 
Services located the lower level (basement) of the McMaster University Student Centre B107 https://sas.mcmaster.ca/ 
 
MISSED TEST POLICY 
Students who miss Test #1 for a valid reason and obtained an approved MSAF from the Office of the Associate Dean will 
complete an online make-up test on Wednesday, August 5th. 
 
Students who miss Test #2 for a valid reason may apply to the Office of their Associate Dean of their respective faculty for 
permission to write a deferred make-up test during the October Deferred Final Examination period. The student must 
submit a completed McMaster University Medical Certificate and submit a completed Request for Deferred Examination 
(Form B) to the Office of the Associate Dean of their respective faculty within one week of Test #2. 
 
Students that missed Test #1 for a valid reason and obtained an approved MSAF from the Office of the Associate Dean 
and then missed test #2 and make-up test #1 on Wednesday, August 5th , may apply to the Office of their Associate Dean 
of their respective faculty for permission to write deferred make-up tests during the October Deferred Final Examination 
period. The student must submit a completed McMaster University Medical Certificate and submit a completed Request 
for Deferred Examination (Form B) to the Office of the Associate Dean of their respective faculty within one week of test 
#2. 
 
EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g. severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue and/or McMaster email. 
 
Copyright 2020 © L. Kajiura, S. Mahalingam , R. DaSilva, A. Tracey, T. Rerecich  Summer 2020 Biology 1A03 Cellular & Molecular Biology, Course 
Outline, Department of Biology, McMaster University 
 
Updated May 14th  2020  

 

10 

