 

SCIENCE 2P03  
IMPACTFUL INITIATIVES IN HEALTH 
WINTER 2021 COURSE OUTLINE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Course Details 

 
Professor: Dr. Lovaye Kajiura 
                    Email  kajiura@mcmaster.ca 
                    Department of Biology, Life Sciences Building, Office 426  
                    (905) 525-9140, Extension 27043    
 
Office Hours: Tuesdays 10:30-11:30am  
 
Lectures: Lecture meetings have been scheduled to occur on Tuesdays 1:30-3:20pm (this is a 2hr lecture) in the Burke 
Science Building (BSB) Room 137    
 
Tutorials : Tutorial meetings will be held on Thursdays 12:30 - 1:20 pm in the Burke Science Building (BSB) Room 137. 
 
* note students will be contacted in advance of the Winter term should course scheduling need to be modified due to  
  extreme circumstances 
 

Course Description 

 
The  IMPACT  (Interdisciplinary,  Mentorship,  Practice,  Applied,  Community,  Transformative)  initiative  collaboratively 
engages undergraduate and graduate students from various Faculties, McMaster alumni, healthcare partners, and real 
community clients to understand and address challenges experienced by people living with disabilities associated with the 
conditions  of  arthritis,  cerebral  palsy,  dementia,  expressive  aphasia,  dystonia,  multiple  sclerosis,  amyotrophic  lateral 
sclerosis,  Parkinson’s  disease,  retinopathic  visual  impairments,  dystonia,  cancer,  ankylosing  spondylitis,  and  chronic 
lymphedema. Students will learn and mobilize their applied and conceptual knowledge of science to collaboratively create 
customized devices that help real community clients with activities critical to their health to improve their quality of life. 
 
Prerequisites: Grade 12 Biology U or BIOLOGY 1P03 and registration in Level II or above of any Arts & Science program, 
the  Honours  Bachelor  of  Health  Sciences  program,  or  any  program  in  the  Faculty  of  Science;  or  permission  of  the 
instructor. 
 
Antirequisites: ENGINEER 1P13/1P03, ENGINEER 1P13, SCIENCE 1P03 
 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 

 
 
 
SCIENCE 2P03 LECTURES     
Refer to the McMaster University Fall/Winter 2020-2021 Session Undergraduate Timetable. Lecture meetings have been 
scheduled to occur on Tuesdays 1:30-3:20pm (this is a 2hr lecture) in in the Burke Science Building (BSB) 137 
Science 2P03 is taught in a fusion of Problem Based Learning (PBL), Inquiry, Blended Learning, & In- Person teaching and 
learning approaches. Students will learn course content via several avenues of communication, including, in-person active 
learning lectures/tutorials, collaborative design reviews, guest presentations, workshops, online learning platforms  The 
Science 2P03 lectures will be a synthesis of several resources (supplementary primary literature, including journal articles, 
current research resources, and guest presentations). Detailed lecture schedules will be announced in lectures and posted 
on the Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health Avenue course website. Students are expected to attend all lectures 
and supplement the posted Science 2P03 Avenue postings with their own written or typed “in-class” lecture notes.  
 
SCIENCE 2P03 TUTORIALS 
Refer to the McMaster University Fall/Winter 2020-2021 Session Undergraduate Timetable.  
Tutorial meetings will be held on Thursdays 12:30 - 1:20 pm in in Burke Science Building (BSB) Room 137.  
Completion of the course requires attendance at the tutorials. Detailed tutorial schedules will be announced in lectures 
and posted on the Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health Avenue website. 
 

Course Learning Objectives 

 

 

 

The Science 2P03 course has been designed to facilitate the development of both self-directed and collaborative problem-
based  and  inquiry-based  learning  skills  that  explore  the  diverse  application  of  science-related  concepts  of  Impactful 
Initiatives in Health. By the end of this course, Science 2P03 students will be able:    
 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

to effectively learn and discuss  the fundamental concepts,  underlying scientific processes, and science-related 
research for the diverse conditions, health and accessibility challenges, and treatments experienced by our current 
and previous IMPACT clients, and from other collaborative partnerships  
 
to synthesize information from multiple sources (quantitative and qualitative) to generate topics to research and 
knowledge mobilization tools to address and solve problems,  and to implement the skills necessary for scientific 
studies working independently, in teams, and in mega interdisciplinary collaborations with other diverse fields of 
study, such as Engineering, Rehabilitation Sciences Occupational Therapy, Medicine, Social Sciences, Humanities, 
Business, and McMaster Alumni in science research and health care professions. 
 
to compile, analyze, interpret, and present findings in a professional manner using creative multimedia in diverse 
platforms in written, oral, and online formats 
 
to  effectively  approach  open-ended  problems  in  an  iterative  process  and  effectively  provide  and  receive 
constructive feedback as a member of a mega interdisciplinary collaborative team 
 
to develop increased confidence  in ability to critically apply knowledge to solve  problems in  order to increase 
awareness of science research and health-related issues to be motivated to contribute to mega interdisciplinary 
and community-engaged experiences and advocacy-related initiatives 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 
 
This  Science  2P03  Impactful  Initiatives  in  Health  course  will  help  to  prepare  students  academically  for  subsequent, 
specialized Science courses, and to ensure that students acquire skills essential for upper level science courses and science-
related research and professions beyond the course. 

 

 

clients.  

SCIENCE 2P03 LEARNING OUTCOMES include:  
 
Problem Solving Skills, Research Skills, Communication Skills, Collaborative Leadership Skills 

•  Apply problem solving skills, design thinking skills, and critical thinking skills to generate questions to probe, and 

compile information to share with other participants during collaborative activities. 

•  Perform comprehensive searches of science-related and health-related literature regarding the conditions of our 

•  Develop science communication and science literacy skills by creating knowledge mobilization tools to facilitate 
mega-interdisciplinary  collaborations  (collaborative  design  review  sessions,  create  online  learning  tools  and 
resources to share with the diverse partners involved with the IMPACT Initiative). 

•  Organize  and  identify  integrated  skills  sets  of  the  students  from  diverse  academic  fields  and  our  community 

healthcare partners and professionals.  

•  Provide and receive constructive feedback (critiquing) in a professional and collegial manner. 
•  Design and implement resources in collaborative teams to present at the annual Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives 

in Health IMPACT Symposium.  
 
 

alumni, and faculty from diverse fields.  

challenges.  

Mega-Interdisciplinary Experiential & Community Engaged Learning 

•  Effectively and collegially collaborate with other undergraduate students, graduate students, health care partners, 

•  Collaborate with real clients, understanding and caring about their specific conditions and their health-related 

•  Disseminate  and  acknowledge  personal  and  team  relate  learning  outcomes  during  the  Science  2P03  IMPACT 

Symposium and during the IMPACT Initiative Final Showcase. 

 
 
Professional Development Skills & Personal Reflections of Learning   

•  Reflect  upon  experiences  related  to  partnering  with  real  community  client  who  are  living  with  health-related 

challenges and identify the significance of emotional intelligence and empathy. 

•  Reflect upon experiences regarding the collaborations with Level 1 Engineering 1P13 undergraduate students & 

upper level/ Engineering graduate students in problem solving on multiple open-ended problems. 

•  Reflect  upon  collaborating  with  1st  &  2nd  Year  Occupational  Therapy  graduate  students  to  create  devices  that 

address the needs of clients living with challenges. 

•  Reflect upon collaborating with McMaster faculty, medical students, residents, alumni, and community leaders.  
•  Reflect upon student’s own current experiences (pre, during, post) and their impact on their future academic skills 
sets  and  their  future  careers  based  upon  their  interactions  with  other  undergraduate,  graduate,  professional 
students, and alumni.  

 
 
 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 
 

 

Course Schedule   

Course Materials 

 

 

 

 
The detailed Science 2P03 course schedule will be posted on the Avenue Science 2P03 course website prior to the  
start of the academic term.  

 
There is no required textbook or course packs for the Science 2P03 course. The Science 2P03 lectures will be a synthesis 
of  several  sources  (journal  articles,  books,  online  research  resources,  current  research,  guest  speakers.  Lecture 
presentation resources and supplementary information will be posted on the Science 2P03 Avenue course website and 
on  the  Microsoft  Teams  course  website.  In  terms  of  digital  learning  resources,  students  will  need  a  reliable  internet, 
webcam, computer with a microphone, and speakers.  
 
HOW TO LOG INTO THE SCIENCE 2P03 AVENUE SITE    
1. Start your web browser and go to:  http://avenue.mcmaster.ca  
2. USER ID:   Type in the first part (in lower case letters) of your McMaster e-mail  
                        address (Your MAC ID).  
  
     For example:  If your McMaster e-mail address is janedoe@mcmaster.ca,  
                            then your Avenue User ID is janedoe. 
 
3. PASSWORD:  Type in your McMaster password.  
4. Then click on the Login button. 
 
You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader (this is freeware) to read the pdf files.  
Most computers have Adobe Acrobat Reader installed as standard software.  
 
If your computer does not have it, you may download it from the Adobe website: 
http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html 
 
Note: In this course, we will be using Avenue (Online Learning Platform) and audio-visual recordings for some assessments. 
Students should be aware that when they access the electronic components of this course, private information, including 
first  and  last  names,  usernames  for  the  McMaster  University  e-mail  accounts,  and  program  affiliations  may  become 
apparent to others participating in the course. Continuation in this Science 2P03 course will be deemed as consent to this  
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure, please discuss them with the course’s professor, 
Dr. Kajiura at the start of the course during the 1st week of lectures. 
 
HOW TO USE MICROSOFT TEAMS 
 
The Science 2P03 course will also be using Microsoft Teams for some lectures, tutorials, and collaborative discussions 
and presentations. Instructions regarding how to use Microsoft Teams and support are found on the McMaster 
University Technology Services website, here is the link: https://office365.mcmaster.ca/office-365/applications/ms-
teams/. 
 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 
 

 

Course Evaluation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

                          Value 

 
Final Science 2P03 Grades will be determined by the following grading scheme: 
 
Components 
 
Individual Lecture & Tutorial Participation Activities                                                                                            10% 
                                                                                                                               
Test 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10% 
Test 2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   10%                                                                            
 
Team Knowledge Mobilization Resource Proposal                                                                                                 10%   
Self & Team Peer Review Form for Team Knowledge Mobilization Resource Proposal                                  5%                                                                                                      
 
Individual Constructive Feedback Assignment for IMPACT Design Review #1                                                  10% 
Individual Constructive Feedback Assignment for IMPACT Design Review #2                                                  10% 
 
Team Knowledge Mobilization Presentation for the Science 2P03 IMPACT Symposium                               15%  
Self & Team Self Peer Review Form for Team Knowledge Mobilization Presentation                                     5%                                                                                                      
 
Final Culminating Individual Reflection Report                                                                                                        15%                                                                                                         
 
Final marks for the course are based on a total assessment of each student's record. It is a student's responsibility to make 
sure that his/her marks are complete and correct. Grade adjustment techniques may be used.  However, marks will not 
be bell-curved at any point in the term. The Professor reserves the right to change or revise information contained in this 
course outline. Note that both the lectures and tutorial components must be passed independently to pass the course. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
 
The  Science  2P03  professor  and  University  reserve  the  right  to  modify  elements  of  the  course  during  the  term.   The 
university  may  change  the  dates  and  deadlines  for  any  or  all  courses  in  extreme  circumstances.   If  either  type  of 
modification becomes  necessary, students  will be  given reasonable notice via the Science 2P03 Avenue online  course 
website with an explanation and an opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check 
their McMaster email and course websites daily during the term and to note any changes. Changes will be communicated 
through  regular  McMaster  communication  channels,  such  as  the  McMaster  Daily  News,  Avenue  to  Learn,  and/or 
McMaster email. Marks will be calculated according to the above grading scheme. The Faculty does not approve of altering 
marks arbitrarily at a student's request.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 

Course Policies 

 

 

 

 

 
For the Science 2P03 course, it is the responsibility of the student to attend in all lecture sections to which the student has 
been  assigned.  If  a  lecture  is  missed,  students  are  responsible  for  the  covered  material.  The  professor  and  university 
reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university may change dates and deadlines for 
any or all courses  in extreme  circumstances. If either type  of modification becomes  necessary, reasonable  notice  and 
communication with the students will be given with explanation and the opportunity to comment on changes. It is the 
responsibility of the student to check their McMaster e-mail inbox and the Science 2P03 Avenue course website daily 
during the term and to note changes or updates. 
 
Science 2P03 Test 1 & Test 2 
 
Each of the two SCIENCE 2P03 tests, Test 1 & Test 2 will be worth 10% each and consist of 15 multiple choice questions. 
Quizzes will assess factual, conceptual, and applied knowledge. For multiple choice questions, each question is worth 1 
mark, no partial marks will be awarded. Tests include cumulative questions and will be 30 minutes in duration. 
 
 

Academic Integrity 

You  are  expected  to  exhibit  honesty  and  use  ethical  behaviour  in  all  aspects  of  the  learning  process.  Academic 
credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your responsibility to understand 
what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned academic credit 
or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit 
with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension 
or expulsion  from  the  university.  For  information  on the various  types  of  academic  dishonesty  please  refer  to  the 
Academic Integrity Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of student submitted 
work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their work electronically either directly to 
Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported 
by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic dishonesty. 
  
Students  who  do  not  wish  their  work  to  be  submitted  through  the  plagiarism  detection  software  must  inform  the 
Instructor  before  the  assignment  is  due.  No  penalty  will  be  assigned  to  a  student  who  does  not  submit  work  to  the 
plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal verification that standards of academic integrity  
have  been  upheld  (e.g., on-line  search, other  software, etc.).  For  more  details  about  McMaster’s  use of Turnitin.com 
please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

 
Some  courses  may  use  on-line  elements  (e.g.  e-mail,  Avenue  to  Learn, Microsoft  Teams,  LearnLink,  web pages,  capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic 
components  of  a  course  using  these  elements,  private  information  such  as  first  and  last  names,  user  names  for  the 
McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same course. The 
available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be 
deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with 
the course instructor. 

Online Proctoring 

 
Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require students to turn on 
their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser 
or other applications/software during tests or exams. This software may be required to be installed before the test/exam 
begins.  

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, respectful and dignified 
interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These expectations are described in the Code of 
Student  Rights  &  Responsibilities  (the  “Code”).  All  students  share  the  responsibility  of  maintaining  a  positive 
environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 
It  is  essential  that  students  be mindful  of  their  interactions online,  as the  Code  remains  in  effect  in virtual  learning 
environments.  The  Code  applies  to  any  interactions  that  adversely  affect,  disrupt,  or  interfere  with  reasonable 
participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that interfere with university functions on online 
platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very  
seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these 
platforms. 
 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 
 

 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) at 
905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program Coordinator. For further 
information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities policy. 

 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, students should 
review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests for Relief for Missed Academic 
Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances (RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should follow the 
procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their Faculty Office normally within 10 
working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office 
prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative 
arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material provided by an 
instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law protect every original literary, 
dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. Recording may be done 
by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a student for the purpose of personal study. 
Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with 
the instructor if this is a concern for you. NO part of the Science 2P03 lectures, in-class discussions, course information 
and resources may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without permission in writing from Dr. Lovaye Kajiura.  
No visual media, voice recordings, Powerpoint slides, pdfs, MP3/MP4 media, or course-related information may be 
reproduced or communicated by any means. Usage of cameras or video/camera capable cellphones, smartphones, or 
digital media are not permitted.  Copying Science 2P03 course materials for distribution or posting (e.g. uploading 
materials to a commercial website) is strictly prohibited. 
 
 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Extreme Circumstances 

 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances (e.g., 
severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through regular McMaster communication 
channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster email. 

 

McMaster University Grading Scheme 

Grades obtained for Science 2P03 will be converted according to the following scheme, which is the one in general use 
at McMaster University. 
90 - 100% 
85 - 89% 
80 - 84% 
77 - 79% 
73 - 76% 
70 - 72% 
67 - 69% 
63 - 66% 
60 - 62% 
57 - 59% 
53 - 56% 
50 - 52% 
0 - 49%  
 

A+ 
A 
A- 
B+ 
B 
B- 
C+ 
C 
C- 
D+ 
D 
D- 
F 

12 
11 
10 
  9 
  8 
  7 
  6 
  5 
  4 
  3 
  2 
  1 
  0 

Email Etiquette 

 
When contacting university faculty and staff, always send your email from your McMaster University email account. If you 
use another email address, such as Gmail your email will not be responded to, because you cannot be positively identified 
as a student at McMaster University. When contacting the Science 2P03 professor via email, always preface the subject 
of your email with Science 2P03. Always begin your email with a salutation. For example, “Dear Dr. Kajiura” and always 
end your email with your full name and your McMaster student number and your academic level (for example Level 1, 2, 
3, 4, 5) and identify your academic program. 

Academic Skills 

 
There may be times during your university studies that can be challenging for undergraduate students. For many students. 
For  students  who  wish  to  improve  their  academic  skills,  study  habits,  time  management,  or  for  students  who  require 
specialized  services  for  learning  challenged  students  and  English  as  a  second  language  ESL  students,  assistance  is 
available  at  both  the  Student  Success  Centre  located  in  Gilmour  Hall  110  https://studentsuccess.mcmaster.ca/and  the 
Student  Accessibility  Services  located  the  lower  level  (basement)  of  the  McMaster  University  Student  Centre  B107 
https://sas.mcmaster.ca/ 
 

This information is copyright material (intellectual and academic property) of Dr. L. Kajiura, McMaster University. It may be used only for study purposes and only 
by students enrolled in Winter 2021 Science 2P03 Impactful Initiatives in Health, January-April 2021). This information may not be reproduced for any other purpose, 
nor distributed to any person (using any type of media), who is not enrolled in the course, except by written permission of the Science 2P03 professor, Dr. L. Kajiura.  
Copyright © 2021 Kajiura 
 

