 

Biology 3AA3 
Fundamental Concepts of Pharmacology 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

 
Instructor: Dr. Joanna Wilson, joanna.wilson@mcmaster.ca, 905-525-9140 x 20075 (office telephone)  
 
Office hours: Mondays 10:30 am-12:00 pm; Life Sciences Building Room 526 
 
TAs: TBD 
  
Lectures:  
 

Mondays 930 am- 10:20 am, Location To Be Determined 
Tuesdays 10:30 am – 11:20 am, Location To Be Determined 
Thursdays 930 am- 10:20 am, Location To Be Determined  

 

Tutorials: TBD 
  

Course Description 

Drug interactions with living organisms; absorption and elimination of drugs, variations in drug action, 
drug toxicity, receptor structure and function, and signal transduction pathways. 
Three lectures, one tutorial (three hours); one term 
Prerequisite(s): BIOLOGY 2A03; and one of BIOCHEM 2BB3, 2EE3, ISCI 2A18 A/B, or registration 
in BIOCHEM 3G03. BIOLOGY 3P03 is strongly recommended. 
Not open to students with credit in BIOCHEM 4Q03 or registration in Honours Biology and 
Pharmacology. 
 
This course examines the fundamentals of pharmacology as a science.  Special topics will include the 
drug discovery/development process, environmental issues in human drugs and the use of herbal 
medications as pharmaceutical products.    The course will be organized in weekly lectures and tutorials.  
Students will have class discussions and assignments in tutorial; a group project and presentation will be 
at the end of term. Tests will be scheduled in class time. 
  

Course Learning Objectives 

Students will learn the fundamentals of: 

1. pharmacokinetics (drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination),  
2. pharmacodynamics (drug targets, drug receptor targets and second messengers, efficacy, 
potency, drug response relationships 
3. toxicology (adverse drug responses, therapeutic window) 
4. drug development (drug discovery, pre-clinical studies, clinical studies, post-marketing 
surveillance) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

5. environmental issues in human pharmaceuticals (human drugs in the environment, effects of 
human drugs on non-target species, antibiotic resistance) 
6. herbal drugs (herbal medication, herb-drug interactions) & over the counter medication 
(safety margins for over the counter medications) 
 
Students will be able to describe the major mechanisms that control pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics.  Students will be expected to interpret pharmacological data and perform 
data analyses of pharmacological experiments.  Students will be able to describe the drug 
discovery process and identify the major barriers to new drugs on the market.  Students will 
read and interpret scientific publications in pharmacology.  Students will gain presentation skills. 

 

Course Schedule 

No Tutorial This Week 

No Tutorial This Week 

Tutorial 1: Routes of drug administration (Assignment) 

Tutorial 4: Drug interactions (Paper and discussion, Quiz) 

Feb 2 - Pharmacodynamics I 
Feb 4 - Pharmacodynamics II 
Tutorial 3: Cytochrome P450 Mediated Drug Metabolism (Assignment) 

Lecture and Tutorial Schedule:  
Week 1 Jan 7– Introduction  
 
Week 2 Jan 11, 12, 14 – Pharmacokinetics I, II, III 
 
Week 3 Jan 18, 19, 21 – Pharmacokinetics IV, V, VI 
 
Week 4 Jan 25, 26, 28 - Pharmacokinetics VII, VIII, REVIEW lecture 
Tutorial 2: Drug absorption, pKa and pH (Assignment) 
 
Week 5 Feb 1 - MID TERM TEST 1 (Pharmacokinetics, 20% of grade) 
 
 
 
Week 6 Feb 8, 9, 11 - Pharmacodynamics III, IV, V 
 
Week 7 Feb 15-19 Reading week  
Week 8 Feb 22, 23, 25 –Toxicology I, II, III 
 
Week 9 March 1- REVIEW Lecture 
 
 
Tutorial 6: Agonists and antagonists (Assignment);  
 
Week 10 March 8, 9, 11 – Drug Development II, III, Herbal & Over the Counter Medication 
 
Tutorial 7: Therapeutic index, drug safety (Assignment); Presentation tips 
Week 11 March 15, 16, 18 –Pharmaceuticals in the Environment I, II, III  
 
Week 11  March 22 - REVIEW lecture  
 
the Environment, 20% of grade) 
 
 
 

March 2 - MID TERM TEST 2 (Pharmacodynamics, Toxicology, 20% of grade) 
March 4 –Drug Development I  

Tutorial 8: Drug costs (Paper and discussion, Quiz); Annotated bibliographies 

Tutorial 9: Drugs in the environment (Paper and discussion, Quiz) 

Tutorial 5: Dose response curves: efficacy, potency (Assignment)  

Assign presentations, group contracts  

  

 

March 23 – MIDTERM TEST 3 (Drug Development, Herbal & OTC medication, Pharmaceuticals in 

 

 

2 

 

March 25  
March 29, 30, April 1  

Group Presentations: Start in Week 11 Lecture slots 
Week 11 
Week 12 
Week 13    April 5, 6, 8 
 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 

 

Course Materials 

 
Optional Textbook:  
The optional textbook for this course is Pharmacology: Principles and Practice by Miles Hacker, Kenneth 
Bachmann and William Messer.  This is available in the campus bookstore for purchase. 
 
Students are welcome to use other textbooks to support their learning in the course.  The McMaster 
University libraries (especially Health Sciences Library) have a number of good quality text books on 
pharmacology (e.g. Katzung, Kalant, Goodman and Gillman, Rang and Dale etc) that will support the 
learning in this course.  However, many of these texts provide the material using an organ based system 
(e.g. drugs for cardiovasculature, drugs for renal function…) and the course is not taught by organ 
system.  Students will need to use a variety of texts to support their learning in this course as not all 
topics are in every textbook. 
 

All Assignments:  
Mid terms & exam:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presentation:  
Exam:    
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
20%  
40-60%  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20%  
 
0-20% 
 
 

Course Evaluation 

Assigned in tutorials, weekly 
3 test @ 20% each. 
3 tests plus one exam; top 3 marks count.   
See missed work section for how tests are handled 
February 1, March 2, March 23 
Group project; March 25-April 8 as scheduled 
Optional if you have completed all 3 midterms 
Offer 3 midterms plus one exam, top 3 marks count. 
Required if you have missed a midterm, please see missed work 
section for details 

 

100% 

Total Marks 
 
Group Presentations: 20% (15% presentation, 5% annotated bibliography) 
 To be completed in groups of 2-4 students.  Groups will be assigned in tutorial. 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 
Students will provide a presentation in class on the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics OR toxicology 
of a specific drug.  Presentations will be no more than 12 minutes long, with 3 minutes for class 
discussion and questions.  Students will prepare a powerpoint file (or pdf from another software 
platform) to support their presentation.  Students will upload the presentation to Avenue to Learn (due 
by 9 am on the day of the presentation) so that the presentations can be uploaded at the beginning of 
class. 
 
Students will be assigned to a group within their tutorial section.  Students will be assigned a drug and 
topic (pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, or toxicology) from a list provided during week 8 tutorials.   
 
Students will hand in an annotated bibliography on the day of their presentation that documents their 
sources and what they used these sources for.  
 
Students will be given a group grade on the presentation and annotated bibliography.  Students will 
complete a Group Partner Evaluation Form and marks may be adjusted based on these evaluation forms 
and TA discretion, for individual group members, if the group work is not shared equally by all group 
members. Group member contracts are provided for those groups who wish to use them.  At minimum, 
groups need to specify tasks assigned to each group member and document this distribution to their TA. 
 
In-class discussion is a vital portion of these presentations.  Student participation will be noted and 
students may receive up to a 5% bonus to their presentation grade for participation in the discussion.  
Participation will be graded by the TAs, based on both the quantity and quality of the questions and 
discussion. 
 
The content of the group presentations will be tested on the final exam.  Students are expected to 
attend the lecture slots where students are presenting their research.  Slides will be shared with the 
class for study purposes. 
 
Tutorials: Start in Week 3, 20% of grade 
Students are expected to attend every tutorial and be prepared to complete the tutorial assignments.  
Tutorials are a combination of review sessions and tutorials.  The content is directly tied to what is 
discussed in class. Tutorial sheets are made available on Avenue to Learn for students to print off and 
bring to tutorial session.  Semi-log graph paper is also available for some tutorials.  Please bring 
materials to class.  You are welcome to bring a calculator with you. 
 
Tutorial Formats: 
Format 1 – in class exercise and assignment.  Students will complete exercise in class and hand in to TA 
for marking before they leave tutorial.  Assignments completed in pencil will not be re-graded; only 
those completed in pen may be re-graded.  Students are expected to complete the assignment 
individually. Each assignment (6 assignments total in week 2,3,4, 6, 8 and 9) is worth 2.5% = 15% of 
course grade. 
 
Format 2 – in class discussion. Students will be expected to read the paper prior to coming to class 
(paper is identified on the tutorial sheet).  Students will answer a short quiz on the paper at the 
beginning of the class and then have a discussion of the paper.  Students will be expected to participate 
and marked by the TA on their participation in these discussions. Each quiz (3 quizzes in week 5, 10, and 

4 

 

11) is worth 1% = 3% of course grade.  Participation in the class discussions of these papers is worth 2%, 
based on participation in all three tutorial discussions. 
 
There are eight tutorial exercises in week 2-11 of the course.  After that, students will use the tutorial 
sessions to plan their group presentation and meet with their TAs to discuss their progress.  
 
Term Tests: Students are expected to write all three tests and appropriate documentation is expected 
for missed tests.  If a test is missed with appropriate documentation, the final exam must be written. If 
all three tests are completed, the student is not required to write the final exam, unless they would like 
to offset a lower grade on one mid-term.  Only the top 3 grades from the four assessments (3 tests + 1 
final exam) will be counted towards the final course grade.  
 
Exam: 
A final exam, scheduled by the registrar, will be at the end of term.  The final is optional if students have 
completed all three midterms.  If students have needed to use an MSAF to miss a midterm, they will be 
required to write the final exam.  If students have completed all the midterms and choose to write the 
final, the lowest grade will dropped.  The final exam will focus on the content of the group 
presentations. McMaster approved calculators may be brought into the exam. 
 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 
“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

8 

