 

BIOL 3B03 
Plant Physiology 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 

Course Details 

Instructor: Elizabeth Weretilnyk, weretil@mcmaster.ca, Ext. 24573 

 
Instructor:  
 
Office hours:   LSB 536 (office) or by Microsoft Teams.  
 
  
Lab/TA’s:  
  
Lectures:  

TBD 

 

Thursdays 1:30 – 2:30 pm (or by appointment) 

Monday 12:30 – 13:20 pm and Tuesday 13:30 – 14:20 pm 
Asynchronous (pre-recorded content) will be posted on Avenue-to-Learn following the 
proposed schedule of lectures. 

  
Lab:  
  

 

Weekly time and location TBD.  

Course Description 

●  Principles of physiology and plant cell metabolism. Topics include: photosynthesis, 

photorespiration, mineral nutrition, water relations and transpiration. 
Two lectures, one lab (three hours); one term 
Prerequisite(s): BIOLOGY 2B03 or ISCI 2A18 A/B; and BIOLOGY 2D03 or registration in a 
Biophysics program 

●  Lectures are asynchronous/pre-recorded with closed captions while labs are synchronous.   
●  Prescheduled synchronous class meetings to review material and provide instruction on labs will 

take place during the term. Synchronous class meetings will be done for weeks with lab 
exercises during the Monday, 12:30 to 13:20 lecture slot using Microsoft Teams. Labs are 
attended by the Instructor along with the TAs. 
 

Course Learning Objectives 

•  To develop an understanding of mechanisms underlying plant management of water, nutrients 
and the production and allocation of photosynthate and the impact of stresses like climate 
change on plant productivity.  

•  To practise and master laboratory skills including those used for the study of plants. 
•  To introduce students to experiments using plants at the biochemical, sub-cellular and whole 

plant level. 

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

 By the end of this course students will be able to: 

•  Measure and dispense liquids with high precision, perform spectrophotometric measurements, 

isolate chloroplasts and perform enzyme/electron transfer activity measurements. 

•  Set testable hypotheses, produce and analyse data, and present and discuss results in the 

• 

context of a formal lab write-up. 
Interpret data and draw inferences/conclusions related to plant performance under optimum 
and stressed conditions and draw connections between plant productivity and food security. 
•  Explore the primary literature for insights on interpreting the empirical data students generate. 
•  Creatively modify a lab protocol to enhance the scope of an experiment. 

 

Course Schedule 

 
The following is a tentative schedule for BIOL 3BO3.  Prior to the start of the Winter Term a course 
schedule will be uploaded to Avenue to Learn.   
 

LECTURE # 

DATES 

TOPIC 

LAB 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

January 11 

January 12 

January 18 

January 19 

January 25 

January 26 

February 1 

February 2 

February 8 

February 9 

Introduction/Water movement 

Measuring water status 

Skills lab (Bonus 
marks) 
1. Set up nutrition 
lab 
(Greenhouse) 

Soil properties and water 
movement 

2. Root membrane 
properties 

Root structure and water uptake  

Water movement to leaves/ 
Transpiration 

3. Water potential 

Solute movement 

4. Nitrate reductase 

Nitrogen assimilation II & S 
assimilation 

Complete mineral 
nutrition experiment 

Mineral nutrition  

Nitrogen assimilation I 

P and Fe assimilation 
Environmental stress 

February 22 

Photosynthesis: light reactions I 

 

February 23 

Midterm Exam  

 

 

2 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

• 

• 

• 

 
 

March 1 

March 2 

March 8 

March 9 

March 15 

March 16 

March 22 

March 23 

March 29 

March 30 

April 5 

Photosynthesis: light reactions II 

Photosynthesis: carbon 
assimilation  

Photorespiration 

CO2 concentrating mechanisms I 

CO2 concentrating mechanisms II 

Photosynthesis: Ecological 
considerations & measurements 

Translocation/phyllotaxy 

Assimilate partitioning 

Sink development 

Senescence/Stress responses  

Post-harvest Physiology/Growth 
regulators 

5. Chloroplast 
isolation and 
electron transport 
assay 

6. Photosynthesis lab 
(Greenhouse) 

7. Senescence lab: 
set up 

Senescence lab: 
complete 

 

 

 

 

 

April 6 

Live review session 

 

 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 

Course Materials 

There are no assigned readings from a textbook.  However, Fundamentals of Plant Physiology 
(First Edition) by Lincoln Taiz, Eduardo Zeiger, Ian Max Møeller and Angus Murphy (published by 
Sinauer Associates 2018) is highly recommended to supplement the lecture material.  Copies 
will be requested to have on hand at the Campus Store.   

Papers that will aid in completing the lab reports will be posted on Avenue to Learn. 

Lab coats and safety goggles are recommended. 

 

 

3 

 

  

Course Evaluation 

Mark Distribution:  
 

 
 
 
 
 

 35% 
 20% 
 20% 
 25% 
100% 

 Lab Component: 
Lab Reports (7 over the term at 5% each) 
 
 
 
Reflections on the Lab 
 
 
Midterm: Tuesday, Feb 23, 2020  (online) 
 
Final Exam (scheduled by the Registrar)   
 
 
Total Mark 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
Details on Assessment:  
Lab Exercises and Reports: The lab exercises are an integral component of this course since they provide 
an opportunity to cover the topics discussed in lectures in greater depth. Material covered in labs will be 
included in exams (midterm and final). Unless otherwise stated, lab reports are due one week plus a day 
(the following Friday by midnight) after completion of the exercise. Late reports will be subject to a mark 
reduction of 10% per day overdue. You will be provided with more information about lab write-up 
formats during the lab. Labs will be submitted using Avenue to Learn. Lab outlines will be posted on 
Avenue to Learn one week before the lab exercise is done.  
 
Incentive available for completing all labs & submitting them on time. The incentive entails shifting the 
grade distribution by 5% between the marks for the MT and Final exam, whichever yields a higher final 
grade. For example, if you ace the final but had a tough midterm the allocation could be shifted to 
reduce the midterm to 15% of the final mark with an increased weight on the final exam. No exceptions- 
no late labs and all 7 labs must be completed to be eligible for the mark redistribution.  
 
Absences from the Lab This course has a compulsory lab component. It is the responsibility of the 
student to attend all labs as scheduled. A missed lab will result in a grade of zero unless the absence is 
documented by an on-line MSAF notice or it is supported by the Associate Dean's Office. Unfortunately, 
due to the preparations needed for the labs there can be no provision for make-up exercises/lab 
content in the event of illness, so this is not an option for relief. Your prompt attention to an absence 
will make it easier to determine appropriate relief for missed lab work.  
 
Reflections on the Lab: The formal lab write-up is an academic exercise, one that relates the facts and 
outcomes of your experiment without much self-reflection about what you have learned from the 
experience.  For each lab write-up, a short (250 to 300 word) reflection is submitted at the end of the 
formal lab describing a) what you expected from the exercise before doing it, b) how well your 
expectations were met after completing the lab, and c) in your view, what stood out about the 
experience (eg. did you learn something new?).   More information on this component will be posted on 
Avenue to Learn as will a rubric on how to complete the formal lab report and expectations.  
 
Midterm and Final Exam: The mid-term exam will be released via Avenue to Learn for completion 
during the scheduled lecture slot. You will be given the class period (50 min) to write the exam. 
Calculators and other electronic devices are not permitted. The Final Exam (2 hr) will be administered 
through Avenue to Learn and will be scheduled by the Registrar.  The Midterm and Final exams are not 
cumulative, but some conceptual overlap between each half-term is unavoidable and some review of 

 

 

4 

 

material dealt with before the Midterm is advisable for the Final.  There will be an opportunity for a re-
take of the midterm in case of illness but absence should be accompanied by a MSAF notice or approval 
of the Associate Dean’s office.  The format for both will be similar which is typically short answer 
questions. 
 
Skills Workshop (Introduction to Laboratory Skills): This workshop is not considered a laboratory 
exercise but your participation is highly recommended. If you complete the 1.5h session and obtain 
confirmation of completion from your Instructor or TA, you will receive 3 BONUS marks to the 
laboratory component of the course. You can complete this module after setting up the Mineral 
Nutrition lab in the Greenhouse (ie, during the same lab period). More details will be given in class and 
on Avenue to Learn. 
 
This course may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require students 
to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, 
and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This software 
may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 
“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

•  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has 

been obtained. 

improper collaboration in group work. 

copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

• 

• 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 

 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 

 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

8 

