 

Biology 3DD3 
Communities and Ecosystems 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

Dr. Jurek Kolasa (LS 340); kolasa@mcmaster.ca 

Instructor: 
 
Office hours:  by appointment via email.   
Lectures: Monday, Wednesday, Thursday. 10:30AM-11:20AM, Jan 6 – Apr 9, 2021.  

Planned as synchronous/live lectures.  Location To Be Determined 

TBD 

 
Teaching Assistants: 
 
Tutorial: 1 hour per week, scheduled per section – please consult Mosaic in January 2021. 
Planned as synchronous/live tutorials. 
 
Instructor Contact: 
For all lab section changes, permission for missing coursework/midterms, contact your section 
TA via email. Subject matter contact: via Avenue: Communications -> Questions. 
 

 

 

 

 

Course Description 

The course attempts an in-depth presentation of how communities and ecosystems form and 
function, from the smallest to the global system. In addition to mechanism and principles 
governing multispecies ecological systems, topics may cover the effects of humans on such 
systems, in the context of local and global scale, global change, as well as the reciprocal 
interdependencies between humans and natural ecological systems. In terms of skills, the 
course aims at developing a broader and critical thinking about links between human activities 
and their consequences for natural ecological systems. 
 

Course Learning Objectives 

Upon successful completion of this course students will be able to:  

•  Examine, explain and critique important, and oftentimes unresolved, concepts and 

issues in ecology.  

•  Demonstrate problem-solving abilities informed by critical literature research, problem 

identification, sound data analysis, and appropriate interpretation of results, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

• 

communicated in a clear manner that adheres to modern standards of scientific 
communication (written and/or oral presentation). 
Identify the strengths, weaknesses and requirements of different approaches to “doing 
ecology”, including: observation & description of natural patterns, model-building and 
laboratory & field experiments. 

 

Course Schedule 

Topics and approximate dates (to be decided in December) 

  

Date 

  

 Lecture Topic 

  
Comments/topic #  

Dates TBD 

Introduction, species and habitats 

Introduction, species and habitats 

How to design an ecosystem .. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Methods 

Site creation 

Dispersal 

Dispersal 

Indirect interactions 

Indirect interactions: Queen of trees video 

Queen of trees, continued 

Assembly rules 

Succession (Okavango islands) 

Succession (Okavango islands) 

Succession on land 

Succession on land   

Catch up lecture 

Catch up lecture 

Catch up lecture (MIDTERM BREAK) 

Catch up lecture (MIDTERM BREAK) 

 

1 

 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Catch up lecture 

Midterm test 

Succession in water 

Succession in water 

Ecosystem concept  

Ecosystem concept 

Ecosystem change 

Metacommunities 

Metacommunities 

Catch up lecture 

Island biogeography 

Island biogeography 

Island biogeography 

Biodiversity gradients 

Biodiversity gradients 

Biodiversity gradients 

Catch up lecture 

Global ecology 

Global ecology 

Global ecology 

 

in class 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The 
university may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any 
modification becomes necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given 
with explanation and the opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to 
check their McMaster email and course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  
Changes will be communicated through regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster 
Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster email. 
 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Course Materials 

 
Accompanying readings (provided for each major topic). The readings will be available through 
a TopHat education site as book chapters, about $36 per term. 
 
Lectures: Monday, Wednesday, Thursday. 10:30AM-11:20AM, Jan 6 – Apr 9, 2021.  
Planned as synchronous/live lectures. 
 
1-hour tutorial once a week: date and time defined by your section as listed on MOSAIC. 
Group projects and presentations on environmental issues, computer exercises. 
Group meetings and discussions times and locations can be found according to your 
section as listed on Mosaic - please consult Mosaic in January 2021.  
Planned as synchronous/live tutorials. 
 

Course Evaluation 

Grading Scheme: 
Midterm (multiple choice and short answers) - 25%; Tutorial (participation and assignments) – 
25%; developing exam questions (one question per topic) on PeerWise - 10%; Final exam 
(cumulative) – 40%. Details of the marking scheme will be discussed during the first lecture. 

There will not be any deferred midterms or presentations.  MSAF are not required with one 
exception below.  The final mark will be based on the best combination of all midterm, labs, 
and the final exam, with the final exam used exclusively when it is leads to a better mark than 
other combination (details in class). However, all activities (Midterm, Tutorial, and PeerWise 
questions require completion); Midterm marks will be transferred to the final exam if the 
student submits MSAF. If more than 75% of work has been completed, a chat with the TA on 
the make up options will be possible without an MSAF.  If such extra work will not be practical, 
there will be no mark penalty.   
 
Tutorial reports will be submitted to a tutorial section teaching assistant in a format and place 
agreed by the section students and the TA. 
 
Note. Avenue to Learn (http://avenue.mcmaster.ca/) will serve to communicate with 
students in this course and lecture handouts or supplements may be downloaded from 
Avenue.  Please consult this regularly (minimum once each week) to keep up with updates and 
last-minute instructions.  You are also encouraged to use this to further your class discussions 
with classmates and myself.  Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic 
components of this course, private information such as first and last names, usernames for the 
McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to all other students 

 

 

 

 

4 

 

in the same course. The available information is dependent on the technology used. 
Continuation in this course will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any 
questions or concerns about such disclosure, please discuss this with the course instructor. 
 
This course may use online proctoring software for tests and exams if winter term will require that. This 
software may require students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record 
their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests 
or exams. This software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of 
zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F 
assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. For 
information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, 
located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

•  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 
improper collaboration in group work. 
copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

• 
• 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 
 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. In this course however, you do not need MSAF report. If 
you miss work for whatever reason, we will calculate your mark based on the work done as long as it 
constitutes a minimum of 75% of expected activities. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

