 

Biology 3EI3 
Ecological Indicators 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

 
Instructor:  Dr. Pat Chow-Fraser,  chowfras@mcmaster.ca   
 
Course Coordinator: Mihaela Georgescu,  mgeorg@mcmaster.ca 
  
Lab/TA’s: Name(s) TBD 
 
Appointments:  Please send an email directly to Dr. Chow-Fraser or your TA for one-on-one 
appointments. 
  
Lectures: Thursdays 10:30-12:20 , Location To Be Determined  
 
Lab Modules:  Tuesdays 14:30-17:20 in BSB 121 or LSB 107 

Course Description 

Students learn how to assess the health of Great Lakes ecosystems, including wetlands, woodlots, and 
streams using established ecological indicators. 
One 2-h lectures, one lab (three hours); one term 
Prerequisite (s):  BIOLOGY 2F03 or ISCI 2A18 
 
Class and lab format: 
All class presentations during scheduled lectures are posted on Avenue prior to the start of in-person 
classes. Labs will take place weekly in either BSB 121 or in LSB 107 and student attendance is 
mandatory.  Lab instructions and materials required for exercises will be posted on Avenue prior to the 
beginning of each lab. 
 

Course Objectives 

By the end of this course students will be able to: 

•  Understand the derivation and use of a variety of ecological indicators used commonly in 

freshwater ecosystems 

•  Know how to use these indicators to assess the health status of lakes, wetlands and streams 
•  Know how to use QGIS to measure basic morphometric indices and to determine the effects of 

land uses on downstream water quality 

•  Know how to conduct basic statistical tests and interpret results for scientific presentations 
•  Apply what they have learned to a novel site (lake, wetland or stream), assess the health status 

of the ecosystem and make a formal presentation of their findings to the class 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

Please note that the topics for the course is tentative and may change to accommodate cancellations of 
classes or labs due to inclement weather and/or other unanticipated events. Students will be notified on 
Avenue if any portion of the grade assessment is affected by such unplanned disruptions and how the new 
marking scheme will be altered. 

Course Schedule 

 

To be posted 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 

Course Materials 

Although there is no required textbook for this course, students are required to use QGIS software (free 
open online software), Kritik software (available at $20 for the term) and SAS JMP software (1-month 
trial; $40 for 6-month license).  Students must also download slide presentations and other written or 
audio-visual resources from Avenue for each class or lab. 
 
 

Course Evaluation 

There will be 1 midterm exam (25 marks) and a lab practical exam (15 marks) on dates to be 
determined.  There is no final exam. 
 

Lab assignments, quizzes and peer evaluation  
Midterm Exam  
Final Project Presentation includes 5% for peer evaluations 
Final Lab Practical Exam  

35.0% 
25.0% 
25.0% 
15.0% 
                         100.0% 

Total 

 
Specific accommodation for missed components listed above  
 
General policy:   
•  Students in this course are required to attend all weekly labs.  The due date for assignments will be 

specified in class presentations and the course outline.  Extensions for any assignment or activity may 
be given and will be posted on Avenue.  Even if a student does not attend a particular lab, the 
assignments associated with labs must be completed and submitted by the due date associated 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

with the lab. Late penalties will be assessed as follows:  minus 10% within 24 h, minus 25% within 48 
h. After 48 h, the assignment will receive a grade of zero. 

•  Students who miss a scheduled lab must submit an McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF; see 
below) to the Course Professor via email.  There is no replacement lab.  Students must arrange to 
with the Professor or TA to catch up on what has been missed.  With a valid MSAF, marks for missed 
in-lab quizzes will be put towards the mid-term exam (if the missed component occurs prior to the 
mid-term) or to the lab practical exam (if the missed component occurs after the mid-term).   
•  NOTE:  A unique Dropbox is created for each assignment. It is the responsibility of all students to 
know the correct Dropbox for each assignment.  If students have questions, they should ask the 
Professor or Teaching Assistant.  Assignments that are submitted to the wrong Dropbox will not be 
graded and will be given a grade of zero.  Students who find that they have made a mistake may 
submit the assignment again to the correct Dropbox. As long as the assignment is submitted by the 
due date/time, it will be graded without penalty. 

•  With a valid MSAF, students who misses the scheduled mid-term exam will be given an opportunity 

to write it at a later date. With a valid MSAF, students who misses the lab practical exam may take an 
oral examination with the Professor and TA as soon as possible after the lab practical.   

•  To receive a passing grade for the course, students must take both the mid-term and the lab practical 

exam, attend a minimum of 7 labs and submit all assignments.  

 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Integrity 

As a McMaster student, you are expected to exhibit honesty and ethical behaviour in all aspects of the 
learning process.  The academic credentials that you earn are rooted in the principles of honesty and 
academic integrity. 
  
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage.  This behaviour can result in serious consequences, (e.g., the grade of 
zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript which reads: “Grade of F assigned 
for academic dishonesty”) and/or suspension of expulsion from the university). 
 
It is your responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. For information on the 
various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy.  
 
Some helpful information can be found here  
 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

1.  Plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 
Improper collaboration in group work. 

2. 
3.  Copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations 

  
Students who have access to authorized recorded lectures in a course may use these recordings only 
for personal or group study and should not reproduce, share or upload the recording to any publicly 
accessible web environment.  Similarly, notes, slides, evaluations and tests are for personal use and 
should not be shared with others outside of a course. 
 
Additional information: McMaster University Policies and Guidelines for Students 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 
“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 
improper collaboration in group work. 

● 
●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

 

 

 

4 

 

 

 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

Students must be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in virtual learning 
environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or interfere with 
reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that interfere with 
university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, Microsoft Teams 
or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes may include 
restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

