BIOLOGY 3EP3 APPLIED BIOLOGY PLACEMENT COURSE OUTLINE 
AND PERMISSION FORM 

 

 

Course Coordinator: Dr. Michael O’Donnell (odonnell@mcmaster.ca) LSB 530  
Course Administrator: Tania Baricevic (baricevt@mcmaster.ca ) LSB 118 
 
Prerequisite(s): Credit or registration in SCIENCE 2C00; and registration in Level III or above of a  program in 
the Faculty of Science; and permission of the academic supervisor and the course coordinator (or 
designate). 
Antirequisite(s): EARTH SC 3IN3, 4IN3, GEOG 3MI3, 3MV3, LIFE SCI 3EP3, 3EX6, SCIENCE  3EP3, 3EX6 
 

COURSE OUTLINE 
This  placement  course  provides  students  with  the  opportunity  to  explore  career  options  and  integrate 
academics with a community, volunteer or professional experience. The student will be responsible for an 
academic  component  in  addition  to  the  work  placement.  Normally  students  will  complete  60  hours  of 
placement work, which may be carried out over one or two terms. Students wishing to  enroll in the Applied 
Biology Placement course BIOL 3EP3 must first seek the support of two supervisors: the academic supervisor 
and the placement supervisor. The placement supervisor  in consultation with the student determines the 
work component and job description. She/he oversees  the work conducted during a community, volunteer 
or  professional  experience  and  will  verify  the  completion  of  a  minimum  of  60  hours  of  experience.  The 
academic supervisor evaluates the  relevance of the placement to the student’s academic program and the 
knowledge/experience gained  by the student. He/she must be a Faculty member or Associate member of 
the Biology Department at  McMaster University. The academic supervisor, in consultation with the student 
will  determine  the  evaluation  rubric.  Students  are  responsible  for  arranging  a  suitable  placement  and 
academic  supervision. Permission to enroll will be considered only after submission of all forms duly filled 
and signed. 
 
Application Deadlines 
Fall,Term 1:  first week of July  
Winter,Term 2: third week of November   
Spring/Summer: mid-March  
 
Your application must include the following; most forms need to be signed by you and your placement 
supervisor:  
Permission form (page 2) 
Job description (1 – 2-page summary of job responsibilities and learning opportunities) 
Course evaluation rubric, completed and signed by academic supervisor (page 3) 
Course agreement (page 4) 
Student Declaration of Understanding (separate document) 
Letter to Placement employer (separate document) 
 
You will also need to complete the Safety Orientation Checklist within the first few days of you starting the 
placement. It will be emailed to you following approval of your application and must be returned to the 
Course Administrator within 1 week of you starting the placement. 

Page 1 of 4 

BIOLOGY 3EP3 APPLIED BIOLOGY PLACEMENT 

PERMISSION FORM 

STEP 1.  Student to complete the following: 
I agree to complete all work assignments promptly and to the best of my ability.  I agree to familiarize  myself with and to 
adhere to the relevant organizational policies and procedures including those  related to health and safety and the 
appropriate standards of ethical conduct.  Further, I understand  that I will seek workplace safety training prior to the 
placement commencing. 

Student No. 

MAC ID: 

Preferred E- mail:   

Please print 

Signature 

Student Name:   

Current Program:  

 

I wish to be considered for enrolment in (please circle): 

Fall/Winter 

 

Spring/Summer 

 

Term 1 

Term 1 

Term 2 

 
Term 2 

Term 3 

 
Term 3 

STEP 2.  Obtain the permission of a Placement Supervisor.   
The work component and the job description is determined by placement supervisor in consultation  with the student. 
In 1-2 pages, list and describe your job responsibilities and learning opportunities.  Be as specific as possible when listing 
duties, i.e. projects, meetings, training, informational interviews with professionals, etc. Attach this document to your 
application. The placement supervisor will also complete an evaluation form at the end of the semester, worth 15% of 
the final grade. 

I have discussed this placement with the student and have assigned the work component.  

Placement Supervisor  

Organization 

Email Address 

Office Mailing Address   

Please print 

Signature 

Department   

Telephone   

Student will be working in  

Telephone:   

Page 2 of 4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

STEP 3.  Course evaluation 
The evaluation rubric should be determined by the academic supervisor in consultation with the  student. It should 
describe in detail how learning will be evaluated (i.e. weekly logs, research paper, portfolio, webpage, in class/public oral 
presentation or poster, final written reflection).  Include the weighting (i.e. %) of each component being evaluated, which 
of the supervisors will  evaluate which component and the respective deadlines. All assignments must be completed and 
submitted by the last day of class. This component will be worth 85% of the final grade. 
The placement supervisor will also evaluate your performance during the placement using a form that will be emailed to 
them towards the end of the semester. That component will be worth 15% of the final grade. 
Final marks must be submitted to the course administrator before  the end of exam period of the academic term in which 
the work placement occurred (LSB-118, biology@mcmaster.ca).  
 

Learning 
Objective 

Task & 
Strategies 
(how am I 
going to 
learn?) 

Evidence of 
accomplishment 
(how will I show 
that I learnt) 

Methods of 
Evaluation 

Completion 
Date 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I have discussed and negotiated with the student the academic component and evaluation.  I agree to  be available to 
meet with the student to discuss the placement experience and academic component  associated with it. The Academic 
Supervisor must also sign the Agreement on page 4. 

Academic Supervisor  

 
Please print 

Department 

E-mail 

 
Signature 
Ext   

 

 

 

Page 3 of 4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Academic 
Learning & 
Application 

Skill 
Development 

Personal 
Development 

 

 

 

Office Address   

Mailing Address  

STEP 4. Complete the “Student Declaration of Understanding” fillable pdf form, available from the Biology website. 
 
STEP 5. Have your placement supervisor complete the “Letter to Placement Employers” available from the Biology 
website. 
 
STEP 6.  Return all of these forms to the Course Administrator (LSB-118) for final approval by the  Course Coordinator. 
Your application will not be reviewed until all forms are completed and submitted. 

STEP 7. Complete and sign the following Agreement: 

The Placement Supervisor will ensure that the Student has completed the required Health and  Safety Training prior to 
beginning work. The Safety Orientation Checklist should be completed for all relevant items. 
 
All grades from the Academic and Placement Supervisor must be submitted to the course administrator by the end of 
the academic term. 

I acknowledge that I have read, understood and accept the above course requirements: 

Date 

Date 

Date 

 

 

 

 Date:________________ 

A copy of this form must be given to your placement supervisor, academic supervisor and a copy kept for yourself. 

 
The information gathered on this form is collected under the authority of The McMaster University Act, 1976. The information is used 
for  the  academic,  administrative,  and  statistical  purposes  of  the  Department  of  Biology  including,  but  not  limited  to,  maintaining 
records;  academic counseling and the administration of examinations. Personal student information provided  on this form will not 
be used  for  any unrelated purpose without the consent of the student. This information is protected and is being collected pursuant 
to  section  39(2)  and  section  42  of  the  Freedom  of  Information  and  Protection  of  Privacy  Act  of  Ontario  (RSO  1990).  Questions 
regarding  the  collection  or  use  of  this  personal  information  should  be  directed  to  the  Manager  of  Instructional  Programs, 
Department  of  Biology,  McMaster  University. 

Page 4 of 4 

Signature of Student 

Signature of Placement Supervisor 

Signature of Academic Supervisor 
 
 
 
 
FOR DEPARTMENT USE: 
 

  COURSE COORDINATOR APPROVAL:   
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

