 

 

 
ONLINE SUMMER 2020 

 
BIOLOGY 1M03 - BIODIVERSITY, EVOLUTION, & HUMANITY 

PROFESSOR 
 
Dr. Lovaye Kajiura  
McMaster University, Department of Biology 
Life Sciences Building, Office 426 
(not available on campus during the summer 2020 term) 
E-mail: kajiura@mcmaster.ca 
Virtual office hours: to be posted on the Avenue online learning platform 
 
 
COURSE / TUTORIAL COORDINATOR 
 
Dr. Sajeni Mahalingam 
McMaster University, Department of Biology 
Burke Science Building, Office 201A/B 
(not available on campus during the summer 2020 term) 
Email: bio1m03@mcmaster.ca 
 

COURSE DESCRIPTION   
 
This course covers fundamental evolutionary and ecological concepts with particular reference to biodiversity and human 
evolution. We examine the dynamics of species diversity and explore the evolution and impact of humans. Emphasis is 
placed on evolution, ecology, behaviour, and conservation as related to the gain and loss of biodiversity. The PBL (problem-
based learning) and tutorial activities reinforce the lecture topics and develop skills facilitating the interpretation of scientific 
observations. The course is a prerequisite for many programs and most relevant to those focusing on evolution and ecology. 
 
PREREQUISITES   Grade 12 Biology U or Biology 1P03 (Introductory Biology).  
 
ANTIREQUISITES    Biology 1M03 is not open to students with credit or registration in ISCI 1A24 A/B 
 
BIOLOGY 1M03 LECTURES - GOALS & OBJECTIVES 
 
Biology 1M03 lectures are designed for students who intend to specialize in Science programs and is required for many 
upper level courses in the Faculty of Science. Upon completion of Biology 1M03, students will be able to: 
    
  1. Effectively discuss the fundamental concepts and underlying processes related to evolution, behaviour,             
           ecology, and the conservation of biodiversity. 
        
   2. Work independently to compile, analyze, interpret, and present scientific data using written and online formats         
       necessary for biological sciences. 
 
The primary  goal  of the course is to  prepare students academically for subsequent, specialized  Biology courses and to 
ensure that students acquire skills essential for upper-level biology courses and biology-related fields of study. 

 

1 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
BIOLOGY 1M03 LECTURE SECTIONS & FORMAT   
 
Refer to the 2020 Spring/Summer Session Undergraduate Course Timetable. 
 
Online lectures will be available on Avenue to Learn (avenue.mcmaster.ca) at 9:00 am on Tuesdays (up to 3 hours in 
duration) and Thursdays (up to 3 hours in duration) each week.  
 
Given the current situation, the online lectures will be presented asynchronously (pre-recorded) to provide greater flexibility 
in learning for students living in different time zones and those students with varied work schedules.  
 
The Biology 1M03 lectures will be a synthesis of several sources of information (the required Biological Science textbook & 
Human Evolution supplement, primary scientific literature (journal publications), and current research).   
 
Lecture podcasts, lecture Powerpoint slides, lecture notes, study questions, and supplementary resources will be posted 
on the Biology 1M03 Avenue to Learn website.  
 
Please note that students are expected to watch all lecture podcasts and study all supplementary materials that are posted 
on the Biology 1M03 Avenue to Learn course website. Students will benefit most by including their own detailed written or 
typed notes into the provided Biology 1M03 lecture resources and slides posted with the online lecture podcasts.  
       

IMPORTANT 
The Biology 1M03 Midterm Test & the Final Exam will include some concepts and current experimental work, 
which are not discussed in the textbook. These topics will be discussed EXCLUSIVELY during online lectures.  
It is extremely important that students review ALL of the online lecture materials. 
The use of supplementary lecture resources will demonstrate how the concepts covered in Biology 1M03 lead 
directly to recent work and to applied research. 

 
 
ACADEMIC PROPERTY STATEMENT 
NO part of the BIOLOGY 1M03 online lectures, lecture notes, online discussions, course-related information or  
resources may be reproduced or communicated, in any form or by any means, without permission in writing by 
the Biology 1M03 professor, Dr. Lovaye Kajiura. 
 
NO photos, visual media, voice recordings, Powerpoint slides, MP3 media or lecture-related information may be 
reproduced or communicated by any means. Usage of cameras or video / camera-capable cellphones, 
smartphones or digital wireless media are not permitted to be used during online lectures. 
Students who have access to authorized recorded lectures in this course may use these recordings only for 
personal study and must not reproduce, share, or upload the recording to any publicly accessible web 
environment.  Similarly, lecture notes, slides, evaluations, midterm tests, and exams are for personal study use 
only and must not be shared with anyone outside of the Biology 1M03 course.  

 
BIOLOGY 1M03 TUTORIALS  
 
Tutorials are scheduled on Thursdays from 1:00 pm - 3:00 pm, and 3:00 pm – 5:00 pm. Please check your Mosaic 
schedule for your tutorial section and scheduled tutorial time. 
 
Tutorials will be offered as live online exercises during the Summer 2020 academic term. In-person tutorials will not occur. 
Online tutorials will begin the week of June 29th. Tutorial information will be posted on Avenue to Learn. Tutorial manuals 
will be posted weekly. Tutorials will include pre-tutorial quizzes, live online tutorials, and sample data sets that will be used 
during the completion of the post-tutorial assignments. There will be four pre-tutorial quizzes, five post-tutorial assignments, 
and one Problem Based Learning (PBL) project. Pre-tutorial quizzes, post-tutorial assignments, and the PBL project will be 
completed individually and submitted electronically via Avenue to Learn.  
 

 

2 

 

 

from  McMaster’s  Campus  Store 

 
 
 
 
REQUIRED BIOLOGY 1M03 TEXTBOOKS & SUPPLEMENT 
 
The required textbook is BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition by Freeman, Quillin, Allison, Black, Podjorski, 
Taylor, Carmichael, Harrington, and Sharp. The course also uses a Human Evolution online supplement by Joan Sharp 
that will be available on the Avenue Bio 1M03 course website. 
 
Note: Students are advised to purchase the most recent edition of the textbooks.  
Do not purchase old editions of the Biological Science textbook since they do not contain the updated concepts and figures. 
The missing information would put students at a disadvantage, so buy the most recent textbook edition. 
 
BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCE,  3rd  Canadian  Edition  can  be  purchased  online 
https://campusstore.mcmaster.ca/ via one of the following purchase options: 
 
Electronic Purchase Option 
 
Mastering Biology & A Short Guide to Writing about Biology 
This  purchase  option  includes  electronic  access  to  Mastering  Biology,  BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCE,  3rd  Canadian  Edition, 
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition Study Guide, and A Short Guide to Writing about Biology. 
 
You  will  receive  an  access  code  from  The  Campus  Store  that  can  be  used  to  activate  access  to  Mastering  Biology, 
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition, and the BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition Study Guide. 
A second access code will be emailed to your McMaster email address by the Course Coordinator that can be used 
to activate access to A Short Guide to Writing about Biology. 
Instructions for Mastering Biology registration are posted on Biology 1M03 Avenue to Learn course website. 
 
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition is contained within Mastering Biology.  
 
Note: You cannot purchase electronic access to Mastering Biology and BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition  
separately. 
 
Softcover Textbook Purchase Option 
(limited quantities, check with the McMaster Campus Store (https://campusstore.mcmaster.ca/)) 
This purchase option includes a softcover copy of BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition and A Short Guide to 
Writing about Biology. A Short Guide to Writing about Biology is an appendix at the back of the softcover Biological 
Science textbook. 
 
Free shipping of this purchase option is available from The Campus Store.  
Enter promo code TEXTFREESHIP to obtain free shipping.  
 
Note: This purchase option does not include Mastering Biology or the Biological Science Study Guide. 
 
OPTIONAL softcover Biological Science 3rd Canadian Edition Study Guide  
(limited quantities, check the McMaster Campus Store (https://campusstore.mcmaster.ca/)  
 
This study guide is considered to be an “optional” resource, however, it is highly recommended as it contains summaries 
and practice questions related to the Biological Science textbook information.  
 
This optional purchase option includes a softcover copy of BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian Edition Student 
Study Guide.  
 
Free shipping of this purchase option is available from The Campus Store.  
Enter promo code TEXTFREESHIP to obtain free shipping.   
 

 

3 

 

 

 
 
This purchase option is OPTIONAL and does not include Mastering Biology or BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, 3rd Canadian 
Edition, or A Short Guide to Writing about Biology. 
 
Please note the course will also cover supplementary information, which students will be able to access via  the Biology 
1M03 Avenue course website. 
 
HOW TO LOG INTO THE BIOLOGY 1M03 AVENUE WEBSITE    
 
1. Start your web browser and go to:  http://avenue.mcmaster.ca 
 
2. USER ID:  Type in the first part (in lower case letters) of your McMaster e-mail address (your MAC ID), For example:  if  
    your McMaster e-mail address is janedoe@mcmaster.ca, then your AVENUE User ID is janedoe. 
 
3. PASSWORD:  Type in your McMaster password.  
 
4. Then click on the Login button. You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader (this is freeware) to read the Biology 1M03 pdf  
    files. Most computers have Adobe Acrobat Reader installed as standard software.  
     
   If your computer does not have it, you may download it from the Adobe website:   
   http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html 
 
Note: In this course, we will be using  AVENUE for assessments. Students should be  aware that  when they access the 
electronic  components  of  this  course,  private  information,  including  first  and  last  names,  usernames  for  the  McMaster 
University e-mail accounts, and program affiliations may become apparent to others participating in the course.  
Continuation in this course will be deemed as consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such 
disclosure, please discuss them with the course coordinator and the professor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4 

 
 
BIOLOGY 1M03 ONLINE LECTURE SCHEDULE 
 
DATE                        ASSIGNED TEXTBOOK CHAPTERS  
                                     (Please note that students are also responsible for related supplementary information) 

 

                        BIOLOGICAL SCIENCE, Canadian 3rd Edition 

Evolution by Natural Selection & Supplementary Information 
Evolutionary Processes & Supplementary Information 

 
Tuesday, June 23rd       Chapter 22    
                                     Chapter 23    
 
Thursday, June 25th     Chapter 24    
                                     Chapter 25    
 
Tuesday, June 30th       Chapter 50    
 
Thursday, July 2nd        Chapter 55    
                                     Chapter 56     Origins & Evolution of Hominins (Human Evolution supplement) 
 
Tuesday, July 7th            Chapter 57     Origins of Cultural Evolution (Human Evolution supplement) 

Speciation & Supplementary Information  
Phylogenies and the History of Life & Supplementary Information 

Primate Origins & Evolution (Human Evolution supplement) 

Behavioural Ecology & Supplementary Information 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

           Chapter 58    

Natural Selection in Modern Humans (Human Evolution supplement) 

Introduction to Ecology & Supplementary Information 

 
Thursday, July 9th         Chapter 49    
 
Tuesday, July 14th           Midterm Test Review Lecture – Dr. Kajiura will review concepts requested by  
                                       students in preparation for the Midterm Test.  
 
Thursday, July 16th        ONLINE MIDTERM TEST  9:00-10:30am to be completed on the Bio 1M03 Avenue website 
 
The Midterm Test is worth 30%, covers Biological Science textbook Chapters 22, 23, 24, 25, 50, Chapters 55 & 56 (Human 
Evolution supplement), online lectures, Avenue postings, study questions, and supplementary information. The format of 
the midterm test is 30 multiple choices questions (worth 30 marks), and 15 marks worth of written answer questions, for a 
total of 45 marks. The test will be 90 minutes in duration.  
 
Tuesday, July 21st           Chapter 51     Population Ecology & Supplementary Information 
 
Thursday, July 23rd        Chapter 52     Community Ecology & Supplementary Information  
  
Tuesday, July 28th       Chapter 53 
 
Thursday, July 30th        Chapter 54     Biodiversity & Conservation Biology & Supplementary Information 

Ecosystems & Global Ecology & Supplementary Information       

 

 

Tuesday, Aug 4th              FINAL EXAM REVIEW SESSION   
 
Thursday, Aug 6th           ONLINE FINAL EXAM  9:00-11:00 am to be completed on the Bio 1M03 Avenue website 
 
The Final Exam will consist of 80 multiple choice questions. The final exam  is worth 40% and is cumulative,  2 hours in 
duration, and covers all online lectures with a slight emphasis on the material covered after the midterm test, online lectures, 
online  discussions,  online  activities,  all  assigned  e-book  chapters  in  Biological  Science  &  the  online  Human  Evolution 
supplement, Avenue postings, and supplementary resources. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

5 

 
 
GRADING         
Final Biology1M03 grades will be determined by the following evaluations: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16%

4 % 

40% 

30%  

VALUE 

0.5% 
0.5% 
15% 

                                                                                                                                       

DATE                                                                                                             
 
MIDTERM TEST     Thursday, July 16th, 9:00-10:30 am (ONLINE via Avenue to Learn)                 
 
PRE-TUTORIAL QUIZZES (4 in total, 1% each)                                                                               
 
TUTORIAL ASSIGNMENTS (5 in total, 2% each)                                                                                       10% 
 
PBL PROJECT  
 
            Annotated Bibliography                                          
            PBL Individual Written Draft Report                    
            PBL Individual Written Final Report                      
 
FINAL EXAM        Thursday, August 6th, 9:00am-11:00am (ONLINE via Avenue to Learn)            
 
Final marks for the course are based on a total assessment of each student's record.  
It is a student's responsibility to make sure that his/her marks are complete and correct.  
If there are any discrepancies, students must contact the Biology 1M03 Course Coordinator, Dr. Mahalingam, via email at 
bio1m03@mcmaster.ca 
 
Grade adjustment techniques may be used. However, marks will NOT be bell-curved at any point in the term.   
The Professor and the Course Coordinator reserve the right to change or revise information contained in this course outline. 
The professor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term.  
The  university  may  change  the  dates  and  deadlines  for  any  or  all  courses  in  extreme  circumstances.  If  either  type  of 
modification  becomes  necessary,  students  will  be  given  reasonable  notice  with  an  explanation  and  an  opportunity  to 
comment on changes.  
 
It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and course website daily during the term and to note any 
changes. Marks will be calculated according to the above grading scheme in order to be consistent with previous years. 
The Biology Department does not approve of altering marks arbitrarily at a student's request. 
 
BIOLOGY 1M03 MIDTERM TEST & FINAL EXAMINATION FORMATS 
The Biology 1M03 Midterm Test will consist of 30 multiple choice questions worth 30 marks and 15 marks worth of written 
answers for a total of 45 marks completed in 90 minutes. For multiple choice questions, each question is worth 1 mark, no 
partial marks will be awarded.  
 
The  Biology  1M03  Final  Exam  will  consist  of  80  multiple  choice  questions  completed  in  2  hours.  For  multiple  choice 
questions, each question is worth 1 mark, no partial marks will be awarded. The 1M03 Final Exam is cumulative and will 
evaluate course information covered during the entire academic term. There will be a slight emphasis on material covered 
after the midterm test, online lecture-related resources, online discussions, online activities, all assigned e-book chapters 
in Biological Science & the online Human Evolution supplement, Avenue postings, and supplementary resources. 
 
For the Biology 1M03 Midterm Test and the Final Exam, the questions may evaluate factual, conceptual, and application 
knowledge. 
 
This course may use proctoring software (TBD) for tests/exams. This software may require you to turn on your video 
camera, present identification, monitor and record your computer activities, and lockdown your browser during the exam. 
This software may be required to be installed before the exam begins.  If you have questions about whether this software 
will be used, or concerns about the use of this software, please contact the Biology 1M03 Course Coordinator Dr. Sajeni 
Mahalingam. 
 
 
 

 

6 

 

 

 
 
BIOLOGY 1M03 POLICIES 
1.  The last day for enrollment and course changes during the Summer 2020 academic term is Monday, June 29th 2020. 
        
2.  Students will be submitting their post-tutorial assignments and PBL projects to electronic dropboxes that will be 
      available within the Biology 1M03 AVENUE course site. Late submissions will be penalised 10% per day.  
 
3.  To receive credit for Biology 1M03, students must complete a majority (75%) of the tutorials and other term 
     assignments. A MSAF or other note(s) from the Associate Dean of Studies office does NOT exempt students 
     from completing the course term requirements. If a student misses more than 75% of the tutorial and/or term 
     components, credit in Biology 1M03 will NOT be given. This applies even if the absences from the tutorials or 
     tests are validated by MSAF’s or other Dean’s notes AND the student has a passing grade the portion of the 
     course the student has completed.  
 
4. Any marked term work (assignments, midterm test, etc.) may be submitted for re-grading within 5 business 
    days of the work being returned to the student. The work must be accompanied by a re-grade request form which 
    is available on the Biology 1M03 AVENUE website and the reason for the regrade request must be completely justified 
    on the form.  Regrade requests made for frivolous reasons will be denied. Regrade forms and course work should be 
    submitted to the Course Coordinator, Dr. Sajeni Mahalingam via email bio1m03@mcmaster.ca 
 
5. Any term mark corrections must be made before the Biology 1M03 Final Exam is written. Contact the Course 
    Coordinator regarding test/assignment grades corrections.  
 
6. Because this course has compulsory tutorial activities, students must complete all tutorial activities so that they have 
    the appropriate academic skills necessary to succeed in upper level biology courses. If a student does not complete 
    the majority of the mandatory tutorial activities, the Biology 1M03 Professor & Biology 1M03 Course Coordinator  
    reserve the right to withhold a student’s grade until the student has completed the required activities during a future 
    semester. A passing grade in the tutorial component is required to pass Biology 1M03. This policy applies even if the 
    student has notes from their Associate Dean of Studies office excusing him or her from the missed activities, tests, or 
    assignments.   
 
7.  Tests and assignments must be completed and submitted individually, unless other instructions to work as a group are 
     specifically defined. All reports and assignments which are submitted must be unique. It is considered academic 
     dishonesty to submit work that is not originally yours or that has been previously submitted. All cases of academic 
     dishonesty will be dealt with through the office of Academic Integrity at McMaster University. 
 
8. The instructors and the university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
    may change dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If either type of modification 
    becomes necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
   opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster e-mail and course 
   websites regularly (at least every other day) during the term and to note changes. 
 
9.  Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

 

     
For absences from classes lasting up to three calendar days: 

     Using the McMaster student absence form (MSAF) on-line, self-reporting tool, undergraduate students may report  
     absences lasting up to three calendar days and may also request relief for missed academic work. The submission of  
     medical or other types of supporting documentation is not required. Students may use this tool to submit a  
     maximum of one request for relief of missed academic work per term. Students must immediately follow up with the  
     course coordinator & course instructor regarding the nature of the relief. Failure to do so may negate the opportunity  
     for relief. It is the prerogative of the instructor of the course to determine the appropriate relief for missed term work in  
     His/her course. 
    
 
     For absences from classes lasting more than three calendar days:      
     Students who are absent more than three calendar days cannot use the on-line, self-reporting tool to request relief. 
     They MUST report to their Faculty Office to discuss their situation and may be required to provide appropriate  
     supporting documentation. If warranted, students will be approved to use a discretionary version of the MSAF on-line, 
     self-reporting tool.  

 

 

7 

 

 

 
For the reporting of more than one request for relief per term: 
 
Students who wish to submit more than one request for relief of missed academic work per term cannot use the on-
line, self-reporting tool to request relief. They MUST contact their Faculty Office to discuss their situation and may 
be required to  provide supporting documentation. If  warranted, students will be approved to  use a  discretionary 
version of the MSAF on-line, self-reporting tool.  
 
For absences from classes lasting more than three calendar days or for the reporting of more than one request for 
relief per term: if the reason was medical, the approved McMaster University Medical Form covering the relevant 
dates must be submitted. The student must be seen by a doctor at the earliest possible date, normally on or before 
the date of the missed work and the doctor must verify the duration of the illness. Relief will not be considered for 
minor illnesses. If the reason is non-medical, appropriate documentation with verifiable origin covering the relevant 
dates must be submitted, normally within five working days.  
 
In some circumstances, students may be advised to submit a Petition for Special Consideration (Form A) seeking 
relief  for  missed  academic  work.  In  deciding  whether  or  not  to  grant  a  petition,  adequacy  of  the  supporting 
documentation, including the timing in relation to the due date of the missed work and the degree of the student's 
incapacitation, may be taken into account. If the petition is approved the Faculty Office will notify the instructor(s) 
recommending relief. The student must contact the instructor promptly to discuss the appropriate relief. Failure to 
do so may negate the opportunity for relief. It is the  prerogative of  the  instructor of the course to determine the 
appropriate relief for missed term work in his/her course. 
 
The MSAF on-line, self-reporting tool cannot be used to apply for any course work that is valued at 25% or greater 
than the final grade, or any final examination or its equivalent. See Petitions for Special Consideration in this section 
of  the  calendar.  Students  should  expect  to  have  academic  commitments  Monday  through  Saturday  but  not  on 
Sunday or statutory holidays. Students who require accommodations to meet a religious obligation or to celebrate 
an important religious holiday should make  their requests within three weeks of the start of term to their Faculty 
office.   

There will be no discretionary approvals given by the Biology 1M03 instructional team. 

BIOLOGY 1M03 MSAF POLICY 

Result 

Course component not completed 
(MSAF submitted) 
Pre-tutorial quiz (each worth 1% of 
final grade) 
Post-tutorial assignment (each worth 
2% of final grade) 
Annotated bibliography (0.5% of final 
grade)  
PBL individual written Draft Report 
(0.5% of final grade) 
PBL individual written Final Report 
(15% of final grade) 

MSAF submitted for Midterm Test 
(30% of final grade) 

1% added to the value of Final Exam, now 41% of final grade. 

2% added to the value of Final Exam, now 42% of final grade. 

0.5% added to the value of Final Exam, now 40.5% of final 
grade. 
0.5% added to the value of Final Exam, now 40.5% of final 
grade. 
The value of the PBL individual written Final Report will not be 
added to the value of the Final Exam. An extension will be 
provided. 
30% added to the value of Final Exam, now 70% of final grade. 
Final Exam composed of 80 multiple choice questions and 15 
marks of short answer questions, 2.5 hours in duration. 

No MSAF submitted for Midterm Test  Final Exam valued at 40% of final grade and composed solely 

of 80 multiple choice questions, 2 hours in duration. 

 
As  a  student  enrolled  in  this  course  you  have  been  granted  permission  to  access  an  online  learning 
management  system,  Avenue  to  Learn.  Avenue  to  Learn  course  pages  are  considered  an  extension  of  the 

8 

 
 

 

 
      
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.      

 

 

classroom and usage is provided as a privilege subject to the same code of conduct expected in a lecture hall (see 
relevant  section  of  the  student  code  of  conduct  below).  This  privilege  allows  participation  in  course  discussion 
forums  and  access  to  supplementary  course  materials.  Please  be  advised  that  all  areas  of  Avenue  to  Learn, 
including  discussion  forums,  are  owned  and  operated  by  McMaster  University.  Any  content  or  communications 
deemed inappropriate by the course instructor (or designated individual) may be removed at his/her discretion. Per 
the University Technology Services Code of Conduct, all members of the McMaster community are obligated to use 
computing resources in ways that are responsible, ethical  and  professional. Avenue to  Learn Terms of Use are 
available at http://avenue.mcmaster.ca.  

Student Code of Conduct - Appendix D  
Major Offences include, but are not limited to:  
 
(h) engaging in disruptive behaviour. Disruptive behaviour is behaviour in class or out of class which involves 
substantial disorder and/or disrupts the operation of the University  
 
(j) engaging in verbal or non-verbal behaviour or communication toward an individual or group which is 
considered to be intimidating, harassing and/or discriminatory 

 
 
ONLINE COURSE BEHAVIOUR 
McMaster is committed to an inclusive and respectful community.  These principles and expectations extend to online 
activities including electronic chat groups, video calls and other learning platforms.  If you are concerned about your virtual 
classroom experiences, the Equity and Inclusion Office (EIO) is available to advise and assist students who may be 
experiencing any equity, accessibility, inclusion, harassment, discrimination or sexual violence concerns. You can reach 
the EIO at equity@mcmaster.ca. Thank you for joining us in ensuring that our McMaster online communities are spaces 
where no one feels excluded and everyone is able to enjoy learning together.” 
https://equity.mcmaster.ca/contact-us 
 
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY 
Students are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials students earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero 
on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned 
for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
 
The students are responsible to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. For information on 
the various types of academic dishonesty, please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 
• Plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been obtained 
• Improper collaboration in group work 
• Copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations 
 
Any student who infringes one of these resolutions will be treated according to published policy. 
To deter acts of academic dishonesty in Biology 1M03, there will be multiple versions of tests & final exams.  
In addition, marked student course work will be randomly scanned and photocopied. 
 
 
By submitting this work, a student certifies that the work represents solely her/his own independent efforts. The students 
confirm that they are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process.  The 
student confirms that is her/his responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty under the Academic 
Integrity Policy.” 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/app/uploads/Academic-Integrity-Policy-1-1.pdf 
 
 

9 

 
 

  

 

 

 

 
 
AUTHENTICITY / PLAGIARISM DETECTION 
Students who do not wish to submit their work through Avenue to Learn and/or Turnitin.com must still submit an 
electronic and/or hardcopy to the instructor. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not 
submit work to Turnitin.com or Avenue to Learn. All submitted work is subject to normal verification that standards of 
academic integrity have been upheld (e.g. on-line search, other software, etc.). To see the Turnitin.com 
Policy, please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATION OF STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES 
Students who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services (SAS) to make 
arrangements with a Program Coordinator.  Academic accommodations must be arranged for each term of 
study.  Student Accessibility Services can be contacted by phone 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or e-
mail sas@mcmaster.ca.  For further information, consult McMaster University’s Policy for Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities. http://www.mcmaster.ca/policy/Students-AcademicStudies/AcademicAccommodation-
StudentsWithDisabilities.pdf 
Students who are registered with SAS should contact the Course Coordinator in order to discuss their academic 
accommodations. 
 
ACADEMIC ACCOMODATION FOR RELIGIOUS, INDIGENOUS, OR SPIRITUAL OBSERVANCES (RISO) 
 
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should follow the 
procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students requiring a RISO accommodation should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for 
accommodation or to the Registrar’s Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as 
soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments and tests. 
 
McMASTER UNIVERSITY GRADING SCHEME 
Grades obtained for Biology 1M03 will be converted according to the following scheme, which is the one in general use at 
McMaster University. 
90 - 100%    
85 - 89%      
80 - 84%      
77 - 79%      
73 - 76%      
70 - 72%      
67 - 69%      
63 - 66%      
60 - 62%      
57 - 59%      
53 - 56%      
50 - 52%      
0 - 49%        
 
THE BIOLOGY ACHIEVEMENT AWARD 
The Department of Biology recognizes the importance of superior undergraduate academic performance in Biology 1M03 
among our students. Biology Academic Achievement Awards are conferred to Science I students, who obtain the highest 
standings in Biology 1M03. No applications are necessary as the awards are based solely on course grades. 
 
STUDY SKILLS 
The academic transition from high school to university is often very challenging for many students. For students who wish 
to improve their academic skills, study habits, time management, or for students who require specialized services [learning 
challenged students and ESL (English as a second language students)], assistance is available at both the Student Success 
Centre  located  in  Gilmour  Hall  110,  SSC  website    https://studentsuccess.mcmaster.ca/  and  the  Student  Accessibility 
the  McMaster  University  Student  Centre  B107,  website 
the 
Services 
https://sas.mcmaster.ca/ 
 
 

A+   12 
A     11 
A-    10 
B+     9 
B       8 
B-      7 
C+     6 
C       5 
C-      4 
D+     3 
D       2 
D-      1 
F        0 

(basement)  of 

located 

lower 

level 

 

10 

 

 

 
 
MISSED FINAL EXAM 
Students who miss the Biology 1M03 Final Exam for a valid reason may apply to the Office of their Associate Dean of their 
respective faculty for permission to write a Deferred Final Exam. The student must submit a completed McMaster University 
Medical Certificate and the completed application for the deferred Final Exam to the Office of the Associate Dean within 
one week of the Final Examination period. 
 
EXTREME CIRCUMSTANCES 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances (e.g. 
severe  weather,  labour  disruptions,  etc.).  Changes  will  be  communicated  through  regular  McMaster  communication 
channels, such as McMaster University Daily News website, Avenue (A2L), and/or McMaster email. 
 
Copyright 2020 © L. Kajiura, S. Mahalingam, A. Tracey, R. DaSilva, T. Rerecich. Summer 2020 - Biology 1M03 Biodiversity, Evolution, & Humanity 
Course Outline, Department of Biology, McMaster University 
 
Updated May 19th  2020  

 

11 

