 

Biology 3U03 
Animal Physiology: Homeostasis 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

 
Instructor: Dr. Michael O’Donnell, LSB 530, odonnell@mcmaster.ca , 905.525.9140 ext. 23103 
Office hours: Friday 4:30pm-6:30 pm (LSB 530 or via Microsoft Teams) 
  
Course Coordinator: Dr. Mihaela Georgescu (LSB 119A; mgeorg@mcmaster.ca) 
  
Lab/TA’s: TBA 
  
Lectures: Mondays and Wednesdays 11:30 am - 12:20 pm, Location To Be Determined 
  
Laboratories: Tues, Wed, Thu 8:30 - 11:20 am and 2:30 - 5:20 pm in LSB 109 (Lab manual will be available via 
Avenue 2 Learn.) NOTE: Changes from assigned sections may be made for reasons of academic conflict only.  
Students may make their own section switches via MOSAIC.  Students who miss a lab may not attend another lab 
section without previously contacting the course coordinator. Otherwise they will be required to submit an MSAF 
or a grade of zero will be recorded. 
 

Course Description 

●  Respiration, circulation, acid-base balance and renal function. 

Two lectures, one lab/tutorial (three hours); one term 
 
Prerequisite(s): BIOLOGY 2A03 and registration in Level III or above of any Honours program; or 
both BIOLOGY 1A03 and registration in Level III or above of Honours Kinesiology. BIOCHEM 
2EE3 and BIOCHEM 3G03 are recommended. 
 
Not open to students registered in the B.Sc.N., Bachelor of Health Sciences (Honours) 
(B.H.Sc.), Bachelor of Health Sciences (Honours) - Biomedical Sciences Specialization 
(B.H.Sc.), Bachelor of Health Sciences (Honours) - Child Health Specialization (B.H.Sc.), or 
Bachelor of Health Sciences (Honours) - Global Health Specialization (B.H.Sc.), or with credit or 
registration in HTHSCI 2F03 or 2FF3. 

 

Course Learning Objectives 

•  The focus of this course is homeostasis in systems physiology and the mechanisms which 

achieve it.  This course will cover the regulation of the cardiovascular system, the maintenance 
of fluid and electrolyte balance, kidney function, the principles of acid-base homeostasis, and 
respiratory function and ventilatory control systems.  Aspects of animal metabolism will also be 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

covered.  The emphasis will be on higher vertebrates, principally mammals, but many examples 
and some laboratory exercises will employ non-mammalian vertebrates so as to provide a 
broader coverage for the course. 

•  By the end of this course students will be introduced to the interrelationships between the 

• 

heart, lungs, kidney and autonomic nervous system in achieving homeostasis. 
IMPORTANT NOTE: This course involves mandatory laboratory exercises involving the use of 
animals. In one exercise, animals will be sacrificed (painlessly) as part of the experiment. Other 
exercises involve experiments on the human body (your own).  IF YOU HAVE OBJECTIONS TO 
ANY OF THESE PROCEDURES, YOU SHOULD NOT TAKE THIS COURSE. 

Course Schedule 

 
Week(s)Lecture Topic: 1.Circulation & Pressure-Flow Relationships, 2.Compliance, Distensibility, & 
Cardiac Physiology, 3.The Cardiac Cycle, 4.Cardiac Output and Starling’s Law, 5 & 6. Circulatory Control 
Mechanisms, 7. Acid-base regulation, 8.Respiration  & Pulmonary Ventilation, 9.Control of Ventilation. 
10-12. Body Fluids and Kidney Function 
 
Laboratory/Seminar Schedule (dates TBA before start of term) 
 

Week 

Lectures 

Laboratory/Seminar 

     NO LABS 
1. Introductory Laboratory/Animal Handling Lecture 
2. Exercise, Heart Rate, ECG and Peripheral Blood Flow  

Seminars 

3. Autonomic Control of Frog Heart     

 

1 
2 
3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 
13 
14 

 
  
 

2 
2 
2 

2 

2 

2 

0 

2 

2 

2 
2 
1 

1  
Midterm 
2 

4. Vagal Tone  
 
NO LABS (Mid-term Recess) 

NO LABS 
 
5. Animal Respiration 

NO LABS 

Seminars (continued) 

6. Human Kidney Function 
NO LABS 
NO LABS 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 
 

Course Materials 

 

 

 

●  Recommended Text: Guyton, A.C. and Hall, J.E. Textbook of Medical Physiology. 12th or 13th 

● 

Edition. W.B. Saunders Co. Copies available at the Campus Store. 
IMPORTANT: The online version of the text is available at: https://studentconsult.inkling.com/ 
○  Search for “Guyton and Hall” and select the 13th edition. The course includes material 
from units III (The Heart), IV (The Circulation), V (Body Fluids and Kidneys) and VII 
(Respiration). Students can buy individual units rather than the whole text. Apps are 
available for access via smart phones etc. 

  

Course Evaluation 

●  Marks:     

○  25% - Midterm (50 minutes, during class, week after midterm recess)  
○  40% - Laboratories/Seminars ( 
■  1 seminar – 7% 
■  2 in-lab quizzes – 6% 
■  3 lab reports – 27% 

○  35% - Final Exam (2 hours, April exam period as scheduled by the registrar). The 

examination is cumulative, but emphasizes material covered after the midterm test. 

 

●  Policy on late lab reports 

○  Lab reports and seminar reports are due at 8:30 am or 2:30 pm – one week after 

completion of the lab i.e. at the start of the next lab (or seminar) period, unless you are 
told otherwise. 

○  All reports must be handed in as hard copies unless otherwise instructed.   
○  A McMaster Student Absence Form is required if you miss attending a lab, seminar or a 
report submission deadline.  These are submitted using MOSAIC.  Ensure you enter 
mgeorg@mcmaster.ca as the contact.  
If you do not hand in a lab report but submit an MSAF or can provide a valid reason that 
is approved by the Associate Dean’s Science Office, your accommodation will be a 48 
hour extension from the lab report due date, regardless  when the MSAF was submitted. 

○ 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 
“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 

 

 

 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 
Please note that the MSAF may not be used for term work worth 25% or more. Immediately after using 
the online tool, students MUST contact Mihaela Georgescu (mgeorg@mcmaster.ca) regarding the 
nature of the relief. Failure to do so may negate the opportunity for relief. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

