 

MOL BIOL 3II3 
Molecular Genetics of Eukaryotes 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

Instructor: André Bédard, abedard@mcmaster.ca; 905-525-9140 x23149 
 
Office hours: To be discussed in class. 
  
TAs:   TBA 
 
Lectures:  
  
Tutorials:  
 
 
 

T01 Wed. 1:30-2:20PM 
T02 Wed. 11:30AM-12:20PM 
T03 Tu.    1:30-2:20PM 

Tu We Fr 12:30-1:20PM, Locations to be Determined 

 
 

Course Description 

 
The Molecular Genetics of Eukaryotes has progressed rapidly with the initiation and completion of several 
projects  on  the  human  genome  and  the  genome  of  model  organisms  (yeast,  worm,  fly,  Arabidopsis, 
zebrafish,  mouse,  etc…).    In  addition,  the  characterization  of  gene  expression  at  the  RNA  level 
(transcriptome) revealed the existence of numerous genes encoding non-coding RNAs. Long known as 
products of the “Dark Genome”, these genes code for RNAs playing a role in a wide variety of processes 
ranging from the maintenance of genome integrity to the fine control of gene expression.  In this course, 
we will describe the recent advances in the characterization of the eukaryotic genome, the control of gene 
expression and the role played by epigenetics in these processes.  Regulatory mechanisms described in 
model organisms (plant, worm, fly, in particular) and epigenetic processes involved in trans-generational 
inheritance  will  be  emphasized.    A  wide  variety  of  topics  ranging  from  transcriptional  and  post-
transcriptional  regulatory  processes  to  ethical  questions  arising  from  this  new  knowledge  will  be 
presented in lectures and tutorials. 
 

Course Learning Objectives 

 
The central objective of this course is to present the recent advances on the characterization of eukaryotic 
genomes particularly in light of the recent genome sequencing data and transcriptomic analyses of gene 
expression.  Mechanisms of gene expression and epigenetic processes will be discussed more thoroughly.  
By the end of this course, it is expected that students: 
 

●  Will have a good understanding of the structure or eukaryotic genomes 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

●  Will be able to integrate data obtained from sequencing analyses, transcriptome 

characterization and genome-wide association studies (GWAS). 

●  Will know the basic mechanisms of eukaryotic gene expression with a particular focus on 

transcription and coupling mechanisms of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulatory 
processes. 

●  Will have a good knowledge of processes depending on the state of chromatin condensation 

including the molecular machinery controlling this state(s). 

●  Will understand the role of long and short non-coding RNAs in the control of gene expression, 

chromatin condensation and the maintenance of genome integrity. 

●  Will understand the role of pioneering transcription factors in cell reprogramming. 
●  Will have significant understanding of processes of epigenetic transgenerational inheritance. 

  

 

 

 

Course Schedule and List of Topics for 2021 

Each “Unit” corresponds to about three lectures or one week of lecturing according to the following 
order: 
 

1-  Introduction: Characterization of the Eukaryotic Genome – A Work in Progress  

 

 

The “Dark Genome”  

-      Insight provided by genome and transcriptome sequencing projects 
  How much of the genome is transcribed? 
 
-
  What is a gene?  
-
  Why study the “non-protein-coding” regions of the genome?  
-
Answers from “Genome-Wide Association Studies” (GWAS) 
-

2-  Control of Gene Expression: Review of Basic Principles 

3-  Histone Code 

Transcription Initiation – Recruitment of the Basic Transcription Machinery  

 
  Coupling in transcriptional and post-transcriptional processes 
-
-
  Readers, Writers and Erasers 
  Principles in Chromatin Modification 
-
 
-

4-  Active vs Repressed Chromatin States: Overview 

Euchromatin vs Heterochromatin 

 
  DNA methylation and DNA methylases recruitment 
-
  DNA methylation in monozygotic twins. 
-
-

5-  Control of Gene Expression at the Chromatin level 

  Chromatin Modification and Chromatin Remodeling Complexes 
 “Noise” vs Spurious Transcription in the absence of Repression 
 
-
Trx and PcG Complexes 
 
-
  HP1 and Chromatin Silencing 
-
-

 

 

2 

 

6-  Role of Noncoding RNAs in chromatin modification and gene expression 
LncRNAs in scaffolding/recruitment of Chromatin Complexes 

 
  DNA methylation is coupled to the recruitment of chromatin modification 
-
-
  Control of gene expression by miRNA and other small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) 

complexes 

7-  Pioneering Transcription Factors in Gene Activation 

8-  Epigenetic Processes in the Maintenance of Genome Integrity 

Inducible Pluripotent Stem Cells - iPSC 
 

  Pioneering Transcription Factors; Definition 
  Cell Reprogramming by Pioneering Transcription Factors 
-
 
-
-
  Maintenance of the Chromatin State during Cell Replication 
  Maintenance of Genome Integrity: piRNAs & Transposon Silencing 
-
-

 

9-  Epigenetic Mechanisms of Transgenerational Inheritance  

Starvation Response in Worms: siRNAs 
Stress Response in Fly: Role of PgC Complexes 
Stress Response in Plants 

10- Transgenerational Inheritance in humans? 

Epigenetic Reprogramming during Gametogenesis 
Stress Response and Stress Markers 
“Lifestyle in the sperm”: Role of small RNAs 

 

 

 

 

-

 
 
-
 
-
-

 
 
-
 
-
-

-

11-  Personalized/Precision Medicine and Current Questions in Bioethics 
  Definition and Goals of Precision Medicine 
  Cancer Epigenetics, the “Cancer Genome Project”, the “Canadian Epigenetics, 
-
-
  Bioethical Questions: - “Don’t Blame the Mothers”  (Longitudinal Studies on stress 

Environment and Health Research Consortium” (CEEHRC) 

response genes) 

12- Genome Editing 

  CRISPR and other approaches 
  Case study and ethical issues 
-
-

 

 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 
 
 

3 

 

 
There is no textbook recommended for this course but reference/review articles will be provided in 
Avenue to Learn.  All lecture notes/presentations will also be made available through Avenue. 
 

Course Materials 

Course Evaluation 

 
COURSE EVALUATION:  
 
Midterm I (“in class”) 
Midterm II (“in class”) 
Tutorial presentation 
Tutorial summary 
Tutorial participation 
Final Exam 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

25% 
25% 
  9% 
  6% 
  5% 
30%  

The mid-term tests will be given in-class at the regular lecture time.  The exact date of the first and 
 
second mid-term will be discussed with the class during the semester. 

TUTORIALS SESSIONS: 

 
The  class  will  be  divided  into  two  groups  for  tutorial  sessions.    The  tutorials  will  consist  in  the  short 
presentation (15-20 min) of a research article on current topics of interest by the students.  These articles 
will be selected by the course coordinator. A summary of the article, worth 6% of the final grade, must 
also  be  provided  by  the  student  presenting  the  article.    A  schedule  of  these  presentations  will  be 
established early in the semester. Participation to the tutorials will be evaluated though completion of 
forms by students attending the tutorials.  Guidelines, including the marking scheme, for the presentation 
and summary of the article will be discussed in class/tutorials and posted on Avenue to Learn. 
 
 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 

 

“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

7 

