 

 
 

 

 

 

 

MOLECULAR BIOLOGY 3M03 
Fundamental Concepts of Development 
Winter 2021 

 

Course Details 

 

 

 

 

LSB 429 

 

 

 

 

Instructor: 
Dr. Roger Jacobs 

 
Undergraduate Coordinator: 
Dr. Mihaela Georgescu 
 
Lab Demonstrators:  
TBA 

 

 

LSB 119 

mgeorg@mcmaster.ca 

jacobsr@mcmaster.ca 
Office hours: TBA, - in person or Microsoft Teams 

Lectures: 
Lab: 
 
Text:    

 
 

 
 

Mon and Wed 10:30, Location To Be Determined 
Tues and Wed 2:30.  LSB 
Developmental Biology  - Barresi & Gilbert 11th or 12th  Edition 
Shared or Electronic copy is sufficient. Text is on Reserve at Thode 

Laboratory Manual 
Laboratory handouts will be available on Avenue to Learn. 

Course Description 

Advances in developmental biology using genetic and molecular approaches will be discussed in 
the context of classical experiments. Various model systems (mice, fruitflies, worms) are examined 
and related to human development. 
 
Two lectures, one tutorial or lab (three hours); one term 
Prerequisite(s): BIOLOGY 2B03 (or ISCI 2A18 A/B), BIOLOGY 2C03 or MOLBIOL 2C03 . 
Live lectures complemented with recorded lectures with closed captions. Tests scheduled during 
class time.  
 
Participation in live labs is required. 
 

Outline: 
This course explores fundamental mechanisms underlying development, from structural 
and molecular genetic perspectives. Lecture material will be complemented by 
laboratory demonstrations, research papers and videos posted to Avenue. 
The first part of the course will focus on early development in classical model systems (sea urchin 
and fly) will begin by examining how pattern and identity is established in early embryogenesis by 
discussing both classical and contemporary experiments. The second part of the course will 
examine specific processes underlying cellular diversity and morphogenesis relevant to vertebrate 
and human development. The third and final part of the course will focus on current research 

 

 

topics and trends, such a role of environment in shaping developmental processes, and how 
developmental concepts are being applied to a wider range of issues in human health. The 
laboratory modules will employ model organisms: C. elegans, Sea Urchin, Chick embryo, Zebrafish 
and Drosophila. We will explore how cells acquire their fate, and build the intricate morphology of 
the maturing embryo and the adult form. 

Course Objectives 

By the end of this course students will be able to: 

• 

• 

Interpret or propose the design of experiments in developmental biology that uncover the 
physical and molecular mechanisms of development 

•  Relate the principles of development revealed by model systems to issues of human 

development 
Interpret research data and explain research outcomes to suggest generalisable principles 
or mechanisms of development 

•  Analyse and communicate primary research literature in development. 
•  Explain the mechanisms of major developmental events, such as fertilisation, induction, 

gastrulation, neurulation, pattern formation and organogenesis. 

Course Evaluation 

 

 

 

 

10% 
25% 
25% 
20% 
20% - Laboratory Component 

2 Class Assignments  
Feb 5, in class 
Midterm I 
March 18, in class 
Midterm II 
Final Exam (During final exam period) 

Experimental design: 3% 
Lab assignment: Chick 1% 
Lab assignment: Drosophila Lab 5% 
Lab assignment: Zebrafish 2% 
Lab Report: C elegans 8% 
In Lab Participation 1% 

 
This course may use proctoring software (TBD) for tests/exams. This software may require you to turn on your video 
camera, present identification, monitor and record your computer activities, and lockdown your browser during the 
exam. This software may be required to be installed before the exam begins.  If you have questions about whether 
this software will be used, or concerns about the use of this software, please contact your instructor. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Course Schedule 

Part I: The Developmental Biology Landscape 
 
1. Examination of early events underlying the development of an organism from a single cell 
2. Compare and contrast common model organisms in developmental biology 
3. Explore cell lineage, differentiation, specification vs. commitment and determination, lineage 
dependent mosaic development vs. regulatory development, morphogens 
 

Reading (12thEd) 

 

 

Lecture  Date 
1 
2 
3 
3 
4 

 
 
 
 
 

5 
6 
7 
8 
9 

 
 
 
 
 

Lab 
No Lab 

 
 

 

 

Intro to lab 

Experimental 
Design 
Sea Urchin 

No Lab 

Lecture 
Introduction, Gametes 
Fertilisation, Early embryogenesis- Urchins 
Sea Urchin gastrulation 
Early Embryogenesis- Amphibians 
Early Embryogenesis- Gastrulation, Organiser 
Early Embryogenesis – Axis formation-Flies to 
Humans 
Early Embryogenesis –Humans 
Neurulation- Mammals 
Somites and somitogenesis 
M I D T E R M in Class 

 
Part II: Organogenesis 
 
1. More about cell type specification and tissue morphogenesis underlying organ development 
2. Concepts of differentiation, specification vs. commitment and determination, lineage dependent 
mosaic development vs. regulatory development 
 
3. Review of modern developmental biology research underlying each topic 
 

Reading (12thEd) 

 

 
 
 
 

Lecture  Date 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lab 
Chick 
 

Lecture 
Limb development 
Limb development 
Neural Development 
Reading 
Week 
Drosophila  Neurotrophic factors 

Myogenesis 
Drosophila  Myogenesis 

Zebrafish 

Stem cells and Regeneration 
Gland Morphogenesis 
 Heart Development 
M I D T E R M in Class 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Part III: Special Topics in Developmental Biology 
 

Impact of developmental biology insights on medicine and policy 
Lecture 

1.  Exploration of modern questions in developmental biology 
2.  Critical evaluation of research literature 
3. 
Lecture 
1 
2 
3 
4 
  
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
* 

Lab 
C. elegans  Evolutionary developmental biology 
C. elegans  Teratology 
 
 
 

Reading (12thEd) 
 
 
Congenital disease, ethics and policy   
 
Review Session 
 
Registrar Scheduled Final Exam 

Date 
 
 
 
 
 

 

The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university may 
change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes necessary, 
reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the opportunity to comment 
on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and course websites weekly during the 
term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through regular McMaster communication channels, 
such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster email. 

 
** Due to the nature of labs involving live animals, sometimes the laboratory schedule does not go as 
planned. We may have to try some experiments and demonstrations again during the “no lab” weeks. We 
will notify you if that is the case. 
 
 
Policy on missed work, extensions, late penalties and missed exams: 
If you are absent from the university for a minor medical reason, lasting fewer than 3 days, you 
may report your absence, once per term, without documentation, using the McMaster Student 
Absence Form. Absences for a longer duration or for other reasons must be reported to your 
Faculty/Program office, with documentation, and relief from term work may not necessarily be 
granted. When using the MSAF, report your absence to Mihaela Georgescu. Immediately after 
using the online tool, students MUST contact Mihaela Georgescu (mgeorg@mcmaster.ca) 
regarding the nature of the relief. Failure to do so may negate the opportunity for relief. It is 
the prerogative of the instructor of the course to determine the appropriate relief for missed 
term work. 
  
Normally, a missed lab will be completed with your lab -mate’s data and both labs and 
assignments may be given an extension for submission. Please note that the MSAF may not be 
used for term work worth 25% or more, nor can it be used for the final examination. 

Academic Integrity 

 

 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning 
process. Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic 
integrity. It is your responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, 
e.g. the grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript 

 

 

(notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or 
expulsion from the university. For information on the various types of academic dishonesty 
please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit 

has been obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and 
ownership of student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be 
expected to submit their work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online 
learning platform (e.g. Avenue to Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported 
by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection 
software must inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned 
to a student who does not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted 
work is subject to normal verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld 
(e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of 
Turnitin.com please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, 
capa, Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, 
when they access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private 
information such as first and last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and 
program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same course. The 
available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in a course that uses 
on-line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or 
concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the course instructor. 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may 
require students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their 
computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during 
tests or exams. This software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to 
demonstrate, respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and 
working communities. These expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & 
Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students share the responsibility of maintaining a positive 
environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community members, 
whether in person or online. 

 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect 
in virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, 
disrupt, or interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or 
behaviours that interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 
Learn, WebEx, Echo360, Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and 
will be investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ 
access to these platforms. 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student 
Accessibility Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make 
arrangements with a Program Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster 
University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities policy. 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other 
reasons, students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate 
Calendar “Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual 
observances should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit 
their request to their Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term 
in which they anticipate a need for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their 
examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon as possible to make 
alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course 
material provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act 
and copyright law protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, 
including lectures by University instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by 
a student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or 
image may be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a 
concern for you. 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in 
extreme circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be 
communicated through regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily 
News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

