 

Mol Biol 3V03 
Techniques in Molecular Genetics  
Winter 2020 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

 
Instructor: Prof. Herb Schellhorn, LSB433, 905-525-9140   x 27316 

Office hours: Tuesdays 10:00am-12:00pm  (by Microsoft Teams) 

Lectures: Thursdays, 9:30am-10:20am, Location To Be Determined  

Labs: Scheduled as 2 x 3.0 h labs each week. Refer to your MOSAIC timetable for details on 

Calendar course description  

Course Description 

 
A laboratory course providing hands-on experience in experimental design and molecular 
biology and molecular genetic techniques. 
One lecture, two labs (three hours each); one term 
Prerequisite(s): BIOLOGY 2EE3; and credit or registration in MOLBIOL 3O03 ; and registration in 
Level III or above of an Honours program in Biology or Molecular Biology and Genetics. If not 
already completed, BIOSAFE 1BS0 (or HTHSCI 1BS0) and WHMIS 1A00 must be done prior to the 
first lab. 
Antirequisite(s): BIOLOGY 3VV3 

The goal of this course is for students to gain experience in performing diverse molecular genetic 
techniques, and hone their critical thinking and research skills. 

Materials and Fees 
Lab coat: $26 from the Campus Store, if you do not already have one. 

 

Lab/TAs: TBA 

dates & times

 
Course Scope 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

Course Learning Objectives 

 
By the end of this course students will: 
 
Lectures 

•  Understand molecular biology objectives. 
•  Be able to develop a genetic model to explain experimental phenotypic results. 
•  Understand bacterial genetic nomenclature. 
•  Gain and appreciation for the history of Molecular Biology 
•  Understand how to apply reductionist principles to scientific problems (and understand their 

limitations. 

•  Use scientific reasoning to resolve experimental outcomes. 
•  Understand current techniques in Molecular Biology. 
• 

Learn how Molecular Biology will impact future societal goals. 

Laboratories 

•  Plan and execute experiments. 
•  Quantify protein, DNA and determine enzyme activity. 
•  Use mutagenesis to generate loss of function mutants to identify gene/proteins relationships. 
•  Maintain a laboratory notebook. 
•  Write a scientific report. 

Course Schedule 

The schedule (below)  used in 2019—the 2020 schedule will be very similar. The final schedule will be 
posted one week before the first scheduled class. 
 
Lectures 
One lecture per week, where we will discuss the theory behind the up-coming labs, the techniques that 
will be used (along with alternative strategies that could be employed), and controls that will be 
important for experimental interpretation. 

Two labs will be held twice per week in LSB 102 and LSB 103. Students will also be required to 
occasionally check on results outside of lab time. 

 

Instructor Lectures (synchronous) will be given live with a designated time at the end of each lectures 
to answer questions arising from the material.  
 
This is the weekly plan for the course. Because of the nature of lab work, it may change if 
circumstances dictate.  Note the schedule is given for the 2019 offering.  Dates will be modified for the 
2021 offering. 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lecture 
 

Week 1  

Week 2 
 

Week 3  

Week 4  

Week 5  

 
Week 6 
 

Week 7  

Week 8     

 
Gene deletion 
(general), PCR primer 
design and 
phenotypic/genotypic 
assessment 
Gene deletion – PCR 
targeting; anticipating 
& predicting results; 
mutation 
 
 
DNA: in silico 
investigation, and in- 
lab isolation 

 
 
 
Cloning and ligations 

 
Transformations and 
choice of bacterial 
strain. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protein 
overexpression and 
purification; different 
gel options 
(Bradford assay for 
Protein quantitation) 

 

Lab Period 1 

Lab Period 2 

Evaluations 

 
 

Introduction 
(1A) Plate streaking 
General: pipetting review 
and solution preparation 

 
 

(1B) PCR of ‘knockout 
cassette’ for csgD 
deletion (1A) Evaluate 
plates from Thurs 

(1B) PCR check and 
clean- up 

Accurate  
pipetting 
(lab) 

(1B) Create mutant 
(introduce knockout  
cassette into E. coli) 

 
(1B) Test mutation 
success using colony PCR 
 

 

(1B) Evaluate mutation 
success 
(1B) Complement mutant 
 

(1B) Test effect of 
complementation  
(1C) Isolate plasmids for 
reporter fusion 
construction 

 
Streak for single 
colonies (lab) 
 
 

(1B) Assess 
complementation 
success 
(1C) Amplify promoter 
for cloning 
(2A/B) Test S. venezuelae 
spore concentration 

(1C) Clean up PCR, and 
digest product (plus 
plasmid) in preparation 
for cloning 

 
Aseptic  
technique (lab) 
 
 

(1C) Ligate products to 
create a csgD-lacZ 
reporter fusion 

(1C) Transform product 
into E. coli 

Hand in 1st lab 
report (Oct 9th) 
Hand in lab 
notebooks (Oct 11th) 
 

Semester break 

 

(1C) Test success of 
fusion construction 
(1D) Transform fusion 
construct into E. coli 
mutants 

(1D) Assess success of 
transformations 
(1D) Pour SDS-PAGE 

 
 

 
 

 

3 

 

Lecture 

Lab Period 1 

Lab Period 2 

Evaluations 

 
 
EMSAs and 
mutagenesis 
 

Week 9  

 
 
CRISPR 

 
Week 10 
 

 
 
 
After the 
mutagenesis… 
 

 
Week 11 
 

 

 

 

Week 12 
 

Week 13 
 

Week 14 
 

(1D) Compare 
phenotypes of reporter-
containing strains 
(1D) Lyse cells and run 
extracts on SDS-PAG 

(1D) Run EMSA 
(2A) Conjugate CRISPR 
construct into S. 
venezuelae 

(2A) Streak out CRISPR 
exconjugants for single 
colonies 
(2B) Analyze 
mutagenesis outcomes 
(2B) Set up screen for 
mutants of interest 

 
(2A) Colony PCR on 
candidate mutants 
(2B) Test candidate 
genes by PCR 
 

 

 

 

 

 

(1D) Perform Bradford 
assay (with std. curve) 
(1D) Pour EMSA gel 
(PAGE) 

(2B) Plan mutagenesis, 
and conduct expt. 
(2A/2B) Practice 
streaking out S. 
venezuelae for single 
colonies 

(2A) Patch out a 
selection of candidate 
mutants  
(2B) Patch out mutants 
of interest 

Hand in 2nd lab 
report 
(Nov 14th) 

(2A) Assess CRISPR 
success 
(2B) Clean up PCR 
reactions and check on 
gel (will be sent for 
sequencing, and results 
will be emailed to you) 

 

 

 

 

Hand in 3rd lab 
report 
(Dec 6th) 
Hand in lab 
notebooks 
(Dec 6th) 

4 

 
Late Work, Missed Work, and Extensions 
Late submissions will be penalized with a 10% per day deduction on the grade of the assignment. 
Students will be able to make up missed work following the guidelines 
under the Request for Relief for Missed Academic Work policy. Missed work cannot be 
made up without a valid MSAF or permission from the Faculty Office, as appropriate. Extensions 
may be given for medical or compassion reasons, or during extreme circumstances. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and University reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 

Course Materials 

 
Reference textbook: 
 
There is no text for this course. Registered students will be provided with a suggested reading 
list one week before the start of the course. 
 

Course Evaluation 

The course grading will  be based on the following weighting. 
 

Evaluation 
15% Lab notebook 
35% Lab reports (3) 
15% Online activities/completion of case studies: 
20% Final exam 
15% Lab performance (competence, pre-lab quizzes, peer evaluation) 

Lab notebook (15%) 
It is critical that you take notes in the lab while you are doing the work. These notes should be 
written into a laboratory notebook as you do the work. They should contain: 

- 
- 

- 

- 

- 

- 
- 

a sentence on the objective of the experiment  
the date when each experiment was performed (this can often be one of the most useful 
pieces of information in a lab notebook)  
reagents added (and volumes of each) for enzyme reactions/assays performed 
(e.g. PCR, restriction enzyme digestions, ligations, EMSAs)  
other technical numerical information such as incubation times (start, end, duration), 
temperatures, PCR programs, antibiotic concentrations in the plates, agarose gel 
percentages, etc.  
any modifications of the procedure or ways in which you deviated from the 
manual  
expectation of experimental outcomes (e.g. anticipated PCR product size)  
the results you obtained (in the form of the data as you actually obtained them), with 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 

everything very well labelled (e.g. what is shown in each lane of your gel picture?)  
a conclusion, stating what the experiment showed (and whether it matched what 
you predicted the outcome would be)  

These sorts of notes are incredibly important when trying to troubleshoot experimental problems. 
Getting comfortable with this now will help you tremendously in future lab work (co-op terms, thesis 
positions, etc.). To encourage you to follow these recommendations, your lab notes will be signed at 
the end of each class by your TA, and will be evaluated twice during the term (once after the mid- 
term break, and once at the end of term). Lab notebooks will be submitted at the end of the labs. A 
sample page has been provided for you in the ‘Helpful Information’ section on Avenue. 
 
Lab reports (35%) 
There will be three full lab reports. The relative percentage associated with each of these may 
be subject to change. 

10% 
10% 
15% 

1st report covering Experiment 1A,B 
2nd report covering Experiment 1C,D 
3rd report covering Experiment 2 

You can find more detail about the lab reports, and what is expected to go into them (along with 
excellent examples) in the ‘Helpful Information’ section of Avenue. Lab reports will be submitted 
in person to your TAs at the beginning of the labs. 

Quizzes/activities/case studies (15%) 
Many of the lecture classes will be associated with online quizzes on the theory behind the week’s 
labs. These are intended to provide you with an opportunity to practice different skills (both 
technical and critical-thinking types), and to give me feedback on 
areas where some additional discussion might be useful. Case studies will also be provided on a 
relatively regular basis, to help you work through some of the more challenging concepts. Online 
quizzes will be submitted online. Prelab quizzes will be handed out and submitted within the first 
10 min of each lab to the TAs. Case studies will be submitted to your TAs during lab time. 

Exam (20%) 
The Final Written Exam will deal with both theory and practice of the material covered in the lectures 
and laboratory exercises. 

Lab performance (15%) 
This mark will encompass a number of different factors/components, including (but not 
limited to):  

- performance on competence exercises 
- performance on self-directed aspects of the labs 
- lab citizenship (e.g. cleaning up after yourself) 
- pre-lab quizzes/activities 

- peer evaluation on your contribution to lab work 
 
This course may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require students 
to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, 

6 

 

and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This software 
may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 
“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 

 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8 

 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

 

 

