 

BIO 4AA3 
Conservation Biology 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

 

 

 

 

 
Instructor: Dr Jim Quinn, Professor, LSB 435, Biology Department, McMaster University   

Email: quinn@mcmaster.ca, ext 23194 

 
Office hours: TBD 
 
Teaching Assistants: TBD 
 
Lectures: Tuesdays: 4:30 – 5:20 pm in ABB 162 and Thursdays: 3:30 – 4:20 pm in ABB 162 
 
Labs: Mondays: 2:30 – 5:20 pm in HH 102 
 
Tutorials: Tuesdays: 1:30 – 2:20 pm in ABB 270 

 

Course Description 

 
•  Examination of how biological principles, mainly from population biology and genetics can be applied 

to conserving diversity in the natural world. 

•  Two lectures, one tutorial, one lab (three hours); one term  
• 

If virtual instruction is necessary: Lectures will be synchronous/live.  Labs will sometimes be 
asynchronous/pre-recorded and sometimes synchronous/live. Tutorial sessions (rarely used) will be 
synchronous/live. 

•  Group-specific progress meetings to develop seminars will not be recorded. 
•  All class meetings will be recorded and posted with closed captions. 
• 

If you do not wish to be seen during live elements, please turn your camera off. 

 

 
Prerequisites: BIOLOGY 2C03 or MOLBIOL 2C03; and one of BIOLOGY 3DD3, 3FF3 or 3SS3; and registration in 
Level III or above of any Honours program 
 
Lectures will examine a subset of conservation topics to illustrate how various approaches can be applied to 
conserving diversity in the natural world.  Students are responsible for all content discussed or assigned in 
readings and lectures (regular or guest).  Attendance on all field trips and all labs, virtual or otherwise, is 
mandatory.   
 
Laboratory sessions will include some field trips (virtual if necessary), presentations by visitors or the 
instructor, and student presentations.  Content covered in laboratory sessions will be included in the 
examination.  
 
The final exam will consist of short-answer conceptual questions that test student understanding of course 
material.        

Group seminars will benefit from two 45-minute progress meetings during which individual groups will discuss 
with the instructor and TA their progress.  We will then provide feedback and discuss how to build towards an 
excellent presentation.  The presentation will occur late in the semester and will be about 30 minutes long 
with 15 minutes left for questions and answers. 
 
Individual final papers will synthesize information from political and scientific publications related to 
conservation biology.  If possible, topics that have divergent or controversial positions, results, or perspectives 
are encouraged whenever possible.  The course paper should (1) provide pertinent background information, 
(2) summarize different sides of any controversial issues or alternative hypotheses, and (3) develop a synthesis 
of the topic presented.  Papers should attempt to provide a novel synthesis of a topic and in some cases teach 
or present a topic from a unique perspective.  The final paper is due on the last day of classes.  
 

Course Learning Objectives 

•  To explore and learn the theory and practice of conservation biology and biodiversity 
•  To develop an ability to interpret primary scientific literature 
•  To effectively communicate information on topics in conservation biology in presentations and writing.   
•  To gain familiarity with practical aspects of conservation projects.   

 
By the end of the course students will be able to investigate conservation and biodiversity issues from 
biological, social, and political perspectives. 

Course Schedule 

The following was the schedule for Biology 4AA3 in 2020 (winter).  Recognize that this may change 
considerably if digital presentation is required.  Please note that from March 16 onwards, all elements were 
completed on line with pre-recorded lectures and field trips. 
 
Week of: 
Jan 6 
Jan 13 
Jan 20 

Lecture topics 
Con Bio, Biodiversity/Hotspots 
Biodiversity 
Global Patterns and Threats to 
Biodiversity/Population Growth 
Human populations – the problem. 
(growth and consumption) 

 

 

 

 

Jan 27 

Feb 3 

Feb 10 
Saturday Feb 15 
 
Feb 17 
Feb 24 

Tues: Local Habitat Restoration (Jennifer 
Bowman, Royal Botanical Gardens)  
Wed.: *New Zealand Conservation 
(Blaine Landsborough) 
 1st Progress Report Meetings 
*Saturday Toronto Zoo Trip   

Study week 
Conservation genetics II 

 

March 2 
March 9 

2nd Progress Report meeting 
Student Presentations in lecture slots 

Lab  
Course introduction 
Topic Pitches 
Presentation group selections and 
planning 
Local fish Conservation Spencer’s 
(Colin Oaks) and Ancaster Creek / In 
Lab discussion (time permitting) 
Conservation Genetics I / Hamilton 
Harbour Habitat creation (Quinn) 
Seminar tips.  

 1st Progress Report Meetings 
Behind the Scenes tour (Bus provided, 
but there is a cost for entry) 
Study week 
Possible catch-up outing to Lot M; 
Scientific writing  
2nd Progress report Meetings. 
Student presentations.  

 

 

March 16 

March 23 

March 30 

April 6 

and tutorial (Wednesday 3:30, ABB 166) 
Protection of local habitats (Dr. Lynda 
Lukasik).  Habitat loss and fragmentation    
 
Habitat, Corridors, and Reserves (Dr. 
David Galbraith March 24) Monkeys and 
frogs: genetics and where to locate 
reserves (Dr. Ben Evans)  
Federal species protection (Dr. Marten 
Koops March 31)  Population declines 
and risk of extinction. 
Course Wrap up 

 

Hands on lab 

Environmental Economics (Dr. Atif 
Kubursi); Climate action (Mr. Don 
McLean) 

Hamilton Harbour field trip 

Field trip to pipeline in Beverly 
Swamp/Tour of Braden house  

 

IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university may 
change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes necessary, 
reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the opportunity to 
comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and course websites weekly 
during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through regular McMaster communication 
channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster email. 

•  There are no required textbooks or course packs 
•  Assigned readings or URLs will be posted on Avenue as announcements 
• 

If an optional trip to the Toronto Metro Zoo is allowed, there will be a charge of approximately $25.00 
per students for entrance to the zoo and to cover a lecture and behind the scenes tours.   

Course Materials 

Course Evaluation 

 

 

 

 

 
Evaluations (subject to adjustment as necessary) 
 
Grades per component: 
•  Topic Pitch 
 
•  Seminar Progress I&II  
•  Newspaper article*  
•  Personal action  
•  Group Presentation 
• 
•  Class Participation 
•  Final Paper** 
•  Final Exam 

 
 
 
 
 
Individual contribution to group  
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

  5 
10 
10 
  5 
20 
10 
10 
15  
15 

 
Bonus of 2.5% if the letter is published. 
** Bonus of up to 2.5% for exchanging and editing final papers.  

Work will be submitted to an Avenue to Learn drop box or as an attachment by e-mail. 

Late work will receive a 10% reduction per day. 

Specifics about assessments are covered in the course syllabus.  Seminar progress and group presentations are 
group based.  Other elements are individual based.  

 

 

 

 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on 
an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for 
academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. For information on the various 
types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of student 
submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their work 
electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to Learn, etc.) 
using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic 
dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must inform 
the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not submit 
work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal verification that 
standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For more details 
about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, Moodle, 
Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic 
components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and last names, user names for 
the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same 
course. The available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-
line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such 
disclosure please discuss this with the course instructor. 
 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require students to 
turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or 
lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This software may be 
required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, respectful 
and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These expectations are 
described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students share the responsibility 
of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community 
members, whether in person or online. 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in virtual 
learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or interfere with 
reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that interfere with 
university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, Microsoft Teams or 
Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or 
removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services 
(SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program Coordinator. 
For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 
policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, students 
should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests for Relief for 
Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances (RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should 
follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their Faculty Office 
normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation 
or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon 
as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law protect 
every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. Recording may 
be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a student for the purpose of 
personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the 
class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through regular 
McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

