 

BIOL4AE3 
Ecology and Evolution of Organisms  
Winter 2021 Course Online 
 

Course Details 

 
Instructor: C.D. Rollo, [rollocd@mcmaster.ca], LSB 226, Phone 23553 
Office hours: By online appointment or e-mail anytime.  
 
Teaching Assistant: TBA  
  
Lectures: Mon/Wed: 2:30 – 3:20 pm; Fri: 4:30 – 5:20 pm in HH 217  
One of the three slots will be used for aspects relevant to the tutorial or testing. Two will be 
used to provide live or previously recorded lectures. WORD PDFs and associated PowerPoint 
files for lectures will also be provided on Avenue. All lecture recordings will be posted on 
Avenue to Learn. 
 
Tutorial: Assigned Readings will consist of a set of scientific papers that will be uploaded to 
Avenue and that you can read on your own time and that can be discussed online.  Questions 
specific to these papers will be included on the midterm and final examinations. 
 
Grading (dates to be determined) 
Courseware (Tutorial Readings) Quiz 15% (February) 
Midterm 35% (March)  
Final Examination 50% 
There is a 5% bonus participation grade for contributions to an electronic interest forum on 
Avenue. This forum may be used to discuss questions associated with the lectures, and 
courseware articles, but also anything at all of interest to the ecology and evolution of organisms 
(news, things you found on line, journal articles you found relevant – whatever you found 
interesting). My experience is that interest drives learning and that it is also contagious. Your TA 
and I will monitor the forum.    
 
Statement from the University: This course MAY use online proctoring software for tests and exams. 
This software may require students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and 
record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software 
during tests or exams. This software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

1 

 

Course Description 

The evolution of organismal form and function from a perspective of the ecological niche. Convergent 
and co-evolutionary aspects as shaped by environmental and biological factors. Material will include 
selected readings. 
Two lectures, tutorial, one term 
Prerequisite(s): BIOLOGY 2F03 (or ISCI 2A18 A/B) and registration in Level III or above of an 
Honours Biology program 
  

Course Description and Learning Objectives 

 
Major divisions of ecology examine various levels of organization (e.g., ecosystems, 
communities, and populations). Ultimately, however, ecology comes down to the design and 
function of single organisms in their niche. This is the world of specialized morphology and 
development, phenotypic plasticity, life history evolution, sexual selection and reproduction, 
physiological ecology, stress responses, foraging, feeding and defensive adaptations, as well as 
heat and water balance, chemical ecology and behaviour. Questions can be as diverse as the 
niches that select and shape the extremes of organismal design (Can insects be warm blooded? 
How did flight evolve? Can plants communicate? Symbiosis, Why do we age? Why do most 
species reproduce sexually?). It is becoming increasingly clear that understanding ecology at 
higher levels (e.g., populations, communities) requires understanding of the specific form and 
function of the organisms comprising these systems. Moreover, it is the organismal level where 
natural selection ultimately acts. Evolution reflects the changes in organisms across time as 
determined by ecological success.  
 
Clearly, these topics cannot all be covered in one term. I will present a number of topics unified 
by themes of the niche-organism interface and principles of organismal form and function 
(Tradeoffs and the Principle of Allocation, the role of RISK). Special interests may be 
accommodated if suggested early enough. 
  

Course Materials 

 
Scientific Papers will be uploaded to Avenue associated with the tutorial.  
Lecture notes and Powerpoints will be available 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

Course Evaluation 

 
Courseware Quiz 15% 
Midterm: 35% based on lectures and tutorial papers provided prior to the examination date (to be 
determined) 
Final Examination: 50%: Covers the entire course content and all tutorial readings 
Forum bonus: 5% based on participation and submissions to the online forum   
Exam questions are largely multiple choice or fill in the blank.  
 
This course may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require students 
to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, 
and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This software 
may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 
 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of 
zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F 
assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. For 
information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, 
located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

•  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 
improper collaboration in group work. 
copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

• 
• 

 
Students who have access to authorized recorded lectures in a course may use these recordings only 
for personal or group study and should not reproduce, share or upload the recording to any publicly 
accessible web environment.  Similarly, notes, slides, evaluations and tests are for personal use and 
should not be shared with others outside of a course. 
 
Additional information: McMaster University Policies and Guidelines for Students 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 

 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. In this course however, you do not need MSAF report. If 
you miss work for whatever reason, we will calculate your mark based on the work done as long as it 
constitutes a minimum of 75% of expected activities. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

6 

