 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BIOLOGY 2A03 
Integrative Physiology of Animals 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 

Course Details 

Dr. Graham Scott, LSB-227 (scottg2@mcmaster.ca) 
Location/platform, day, and time to be determined. 

COURSE AND LAB COORDINATOR: Alastair Tracey, LSB-119 (bioyr2@mcmaster.ca) 

 
 

 

 
INSTRUCTOR: 
 
OFFICE HOURS:  

 

  
LAB TAs:  
 
LECTURES: 
 
LABORATORIES: 
 

To be determined. 

Tue., Wed., and Fri., 12:30-1:20 , Location to be Determined 
 
Mon.-Fri., 8:30-11:20 or 2:30-5:20 in LSB 110 

Course Description 

 
Fundamental principles of animal physiology, including: cellular energetics, diffusion, osmosis, membrane 
transport, excitability and contractility, gas exchange, fluid dynamics, electrolyte balance. 
Prerequisite(s): Biology 1A03, Biology 1M03; and one of Physics 1A03 (or 1B03) or 1C03, or credit or 
registration ARTSSCI  2D06 A/B or ISCI 1A24 A/B. 
Antirequisite(s): Medical Physics 4XX3 
 
The course will be delivered via live lectures and in-person laboratory activities. Tests will occur during  
scheduled lecture time. Laboratories will occur during the term as scheduled and seen in each student’s  
Mosaic timetable.  
 

Course Learning Objectives 

 
By the end of this course students will: 
 
1.  Have a broad fundamental knowledge and appreciation of animal physiology. 

 

2.  Understand the functions of important physiological systems, including the nervous, endocrine, 

muscular, cardiovascular, respiratory, renal, gastrointestinal, and reproductive systems. 

 
3.  Understand how these separate systems can interact and yield integrated physiological responses to 

challenges, such as exercise, changing environmental conditions, and fasting and feeding. 

 
 

1 of 8 

 

 

 

4.  Be able to distinguish some of the key physiological differences between major groups of vertebrate 

and invertebrate animals. 

5.  Be able to analyze and produce written reports on experiments and observations in physiology. 

6.  Be prepared for upper-level courses on more advanced physiological topics and/or experimentation. 
 

 

 

 

Course Schedule 

IMPORTANT DATES:  

Jan. 6  
Jan. 18-22  
Jan. 25-29  
Feb. 5  
Feb. 15-21  
Mar. 12  
Apr. 9  

Classes begin 
Lab 1 for EVEN lab sections 
Lab 1 for ODD lab sections 
Test #1 during class-time 
Mid-term recess 
Test #2 during class-time  
Last class 

TENTATIVE LECTURE TOPICS 

TOPIC 

CHAPTERS 
(Moyes) 
1-2 

Introduction to Animal Physiology 
    Integration, form and function, homeostasis, animal evolution 
Cellular energy metabolism 
    Energy metabolism, enzyme function 
Cellular membrane transport 
    Diffusion, active transport, membrane potential, epithelia 
Cell signalling and the endocrine system 
    Chemical messengers, signal transduction, endocrine organs, hormones 
Neurons and nervous systems  
    Nervous system organization, graded potentials and action potentials, synaptic  
    transmission, sensory systems, autonomic nervous system 
Muscle function and locomotion 
    Motor proteins, muscle structure, sliding filament model, cross-bridge cycle,  
    excitation-contraction coupling, motor units and recruitment, fibre types 
Circulatory systems 
    Circulatory systems in animals, cardiac cycle, cardiac muscle function, blood vessels,  
    regulation of blood pressure and flow, capillary filtration, lymphatics 
Respiratory systems 
    Respiratory systems in animals, ventilation and gas exchange, gas transport to tissues,  
    respiratory pigments, control of ventilation 
Regulation of ion and water balance 
    Strategies for ionic and osmotic regulation, nitrogen excretion, kidney structure and  
    function, evolutionary diversity of excretory systems 

2 of 8 

5,7,8 

6,12 

 

3 

3 

4 

9 

11 

13 

 
 

14 

16 

 

Lab 

Digestion and assimilation of nutrients 
    Digestive systems in animals, motility, secretion, digestion, absorption, regulation of  
    digestive system function, nutrient storage 
Reproductive physiology 
    Sex determination, gametogenesis, fertilization, ovarian & uterine cycles, copulation,  
    pregnancy, parturition 

 

Assignment 

Due Date 

Marks 

LAB DETAILS 

Even Sections 
Lab Dates 
Jan. 18-22 

Odd Sections 
Lab Dates 
Jan. 25-29 

Lab 1: Introduction to 
LabChart 8 

Lab 2: Muscle and 
Electromyography 

Feb. 1-5 

Feb. 8-12 
 

Partial lab 
report -   
Results 

Partial lab 
report -  
Discussion  

Lab 3: Circulatory 
Responses to Diving 

Feb. 22-26 

Mar. 1-5 
 

Full formal lab 
report 

Lab 4: Respiratory 
Gas Exchange in the 
Mouse  

Mar. 8-12 

Mar. 15-19 

Full formal lab 
report 

4% 

6% 

8% 

12% 

One week after 
lab at 2:30 pm 
(hand in to drop 
box) 
One week after 
lab at 2:30 pm 
(hand in to drop 
box) 
One week after 
lab at 2:30 pm 
(hand in to drop 
box) 
One week after 
lab at 2:30 pm 
(hand in to drop 
box) 

 
Please check your schedule to ensure that you know which lab room your section is assigned to. 
Students must attend the lab section to which they have been assigned. Those with ACADEMIC 
CONFLICTS ONLY should arrange their own lab change through Mosaic prior to the add/drop date. It is 
your responsibility to attend the correct lab section and room. NOTE: If you are absent from your lab, 
you may not attend another lab section without previously contacting the course coordinator. If you 
cannot attend another lab section, you will be required to submit an MSAF.   
 
In the event of a storm closure check Avenue to Learn for alternate arrangements for those lab sections.  
Specific information may be sent to your McMaster email address. NO OTHER EMAIL ADDRESSES WILL 
BE USED. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 
 

 

 
 

3 of 8 

 
 

 

 

 

Course Materials 

 
RECOMMENDED TEXTBOOK: 

A  textbook  is  not  required  for  this  course.  Lectures  will  be  based  on 
material in the following textbooks, either of which is recommended as 
an optional supplemental resource for the course: 

 Moyes & Schulte, Principles of Animal Physiology (3rd edition), Pearson 
Benjamin Cummings  

 

 Stanfield,  Principles  of  Human  Physiology  (4th  or  5th  edition),  Pearson 
Benjamin Cummings 

 
Lab manuals for each lab will be made available on Avenue to Learn and must be brought to the lab.  
* You must bring a USB stick to labs on which to save your data. 
 

Course Evaluation 

30% 
30% 
40% 

2 Tests @ 15% each (written during lecture time); tests are cumulative 
Laboratory reports (see the lab details for a detailed breakdown)  
Final Exam; exam is cumulative  

The Biology 2A03 final grades will be calculated based upon the following course assessments: 
 
MARKS: 
 
 
 
If the tests and final exam cannot be administered in-person, the course may use online proctoring 
software for tests and exams. This software may require students to turn on their video camera, present 
identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other 
applications/software during tests or exams. This software may be required to be installed before the 
test/exam begins. 
  
Please discuss any uncertainties about term grades with your TA or the course coordinator before the 
final exam is written. Final grades obtained for 2A03 will be converted according to the scheme used at 
McMaster University. 

90-100% 
85-89% 
80-84% 
77-79% 
73-76% 
70-72% 

67-69% 

A+ 
A 
A- 
B+ 
B 
B- 

C+ 

12 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 

6 

63-66% 
60-62% 
57-59% 
53-56% 
50-52% 
0-49% 
 

C 
C- 
D+ 
D 
D- 
F 
 

5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 

4 of 8 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

 
POLICY REGARDING MISSED WORK IN THE FACULTY OF SCIENCE 
 
McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 
Undergraduate students who have missed academic work resulting from a medical or personal situation, 
lasting  up  to  3  calendar  days,  may  request  relief,  once  per  term,  without  documentation,  using  the 
McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF). Absences for a longer duration or for other reasons must be 
reported  to  your  Faculty/Program  office,  with  documentation,  and  relief  from  term  work  may  not 
necessarily  be  granted.  When  using  the  MSAF,  please  put  Alastair  Tracey  as  the  contact  email 
(bioyr2@mcmaster.ca). Please note that the MSAF may not be used for term work worth 25% or more, 
nor can it be used for the final examination. 
 
POLICY ON LATE LAB REPORTS 
Lab  reports  are  due  at  2:30  pm,  one  week  after  you  performed  the  exercises.  Lab  reports  must  be 
submitted in hard copy to the correct Bio 2A03 dropbox on the first floor of LSB (near the elevators). It is 
your responsibility to ensure they are placed in the correct dropbox. Reports received after the deadline 
or found later in the wrong dropbox, will be penalized at 10% per day. If a MSAF is provided, students 
will receive a 3-day extension on the due date of the lab report, but it is your responsibility to contact 
your  TA  in  advance  to  make  arrangements  for  submitting  the  report.  IMPORTANT  NOTE  –  Students 
MUST complete ALL of the lab components to receive credit for Biology 2A03. 

 
POLICY ON MISSED TESTS 
The weight of a missed test will be added to the value of the final exam if a MSAF is provided. Missed 
tests without a MSAF will receive a grade of zero.   
 

Academic Integrity 

 
Attention  is  drawn  to  the  Statement  on  Academic  Ethics  and  the  Senate  Resolutions  on  Academic 
Dishonesty as found in the Senate Policy Statements distributed at registration and available in the Senate 
Office.  Any student who infringes any one of these resolutions will be treated according to published 
policy. 
 
You  are  expected  to  exhibit  honesty  and  use  ethical  behaviour  in  all  aspects  of  the  learning  process. 
Academic  credentials  you  earn  are  rooted  in  principles  of  honesty  and  academic  integrity.  It  is  your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 
 

 
 

5 of 8 

 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero 
on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned 
for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. For information on the 
various  types  of  academic  dishonesty  please  refer  to  the  Academic  Integrity  Policy,  located  at 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 
 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

1.  Plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

2. 

obtained.  
Improper collaboration in group work. While students may find it helpful to discuss assignments 
with each other, it is not acceptable to prepare common answers. Where laboratories require 
you to work in groups the data obtained will be all the same, but your treatment of it (tables, 
graphs,  Results  &  Discussion)  must  be  your  own  individual  work.  Your  answers  to  theory 
questions, results & discussion & computer derived graphs should be your own.  For example, 
you and your lab partner(s) cannot print/insert 2 to 4 versions of the same graph(s) in your lab 
reports  even  though  you  are  working  with  the  same  data.  Each  student  must  create  and 
print/insert their own versions of the graphs in biology labs even though their data is the same 
as their lab partners. 

3.  Copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

 
Some  courses  may  use  a  web-based  service  (Turnitin.com)  to  reveal  authenticity  and  ownership  of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their work 
electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to Learn, etc.) 
using  plagiarism  detection  (a  service  supported  by  Turnitin.com)  so  it  can  be  checked  for  academic 
dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not 
submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal verification 
that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For 
more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

 
Some  courses  may  use  on-line  elements  (e.g.  e-mail,  Avenue  to  Learn,  LearnLink,  web  pages,  capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they access 
the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and last 
names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to 
all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the technology used. 

 

 

 

 

6 of 8 

 

 
 

 
Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have 
any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

 
Some  courses  may  use  online  proctoring  software  for  tests  and  exams.  This  software  may  require 
students  to  turn  on  their  video  camera,  present  identification,  monitor  and  record  their  computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

 
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 of 8 

 

 

 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

 
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical, and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

8 of 8 

 

 
 

