 

Biology 4T03/6T03 
Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 

Course Details 

 
Instructors:  

Dr. M. Fahnestock 
Dr. D. Gillespie   
 
 
Gillespie: 
Arman Shekari   
Tuesdays 4:30-5:20pm and Thursdays 3:30-4:20pm in HH217  
Fridays, 8:30-11:20am in JHE 210  

fahnestock@mcmaster.ca 
gilles@mcmaster.ca 
by appointment 
Wednesdays, 4:30-6:00pm, PC310 or MSTeams  
shekara@mcmaster.ca, x22215   

 

 
 

Office hours:   Fahnestock: 
  
TA:  
Lectures:  
Tutorial:  
 

Course Description 

This course will focus on selected topics in molecular and cellular neuroscience.  The first half of the 
course (Fahnestock) will review principles of molecular neuroscience, specifically regulation of gene 
expression in the nervous system, neurotrophic factors and their receptors and signal transduction 
pathways, and the molecular and genetic bases of neurological diseases. The second half of the course 
(Gillespie) will cover ion channels and transporters, regulated vesicular release, and synaptic 
transmission and plasticity.  Both cellular and molecular approaches will be discussed.    
 
Prerequisites 
BIOLOGY  2B03  (or  ISCI  2A18  A/B),  BIOLOGY  3P03  and  registration  in  Level  III  or  above  of  an  Honours 
Biology program, Honours Neuroscience, or Honours Psychology, Neuroscience & Behaviour. One or more 
of MOLBIOL 3B03, Biochemistry 2B03/2BB3 or Biochemistry 3G03 are recommended. 
 
Format 

●  Weekly class meetings include two one-hour lectures and one three-hour tutorial. 
●  The required tutorial is scheduled for seminar presentations and discussion of assigned journal 

●  Two quizzes will be held during lecture slots at the middle of the term and at the end of the 

articles by the students.   

term. 

Course Objectives 

By the end of this course students will be able to 

●  Critically read original research articles in molecular and cellular neuroscience 
●  Present original research articles in molecular and cellular neuroscience in journal club format 
●  Formulate intelligent questions about molecular and cellular neuroscience 
●  Discuss creative directions for further work in molecular and cellular neuroscience 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

Course Schedule 

 

Week 

Date 

Topic 

Organizational meeting – Introduction 
No tutorial 

Cell-cell communication (Neurotransmitters/Neurotrophic factors) 
Gene regulation in the nervous system – DNA 
Tutorial 1 

Gene regulation in the nervous system – RNA 
Biosynthesis of secreted proteins in the nervous system 
Tutorial 2 

Receptors 
Signal transduction – kinase pathways 
Tutorial 3 

Signal transduction – other pathways 
Signal transduction – anterograde and retrograde transport 
Tutorial 4 

Feb 9 
Feb 11 
Feb 12 

Genetic basis of nervous system diseases 
Alzheimer’s disease; Protein aggregation 
Tutorial 5 

     Feb 15  – Feb 20    Midterm Recess 

Neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental diseases 
QUIZ:  covering Section I 
Tutorial 6 

Ion channels and transporters 
Voltage-gated and leak channels 
Tutorial 7 

Ligand-gated channels 
Mechanosensory and thermo-gated channels 
Tutorial 8 

The presynaptic terminal 
The synaptic vesicle 
Tutorial 9 

Regulated release 
The postsynaptic specialization 
Tutorial 10 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Jan 7 
Jan 8 

Jan 12 
Jan 14 
Jan 15 

Jan 19 
Jan 21 
Jan 22 

Jan 26 
Jan 28 
Jan 29 

Feb 2 
Feb 4 
Feb 5 

Feb 23 
Feb 25 
Feb 26 

Mar 2 
Mar 4 
Mar 5 

Mar 9 
Mar 11 
Mar 12 

Mar 16 
Mar 18 
Mar 19 

Mar 23 
Mar 25 
Mar 26 

 

2 

 

11 

12 

Mar 30 
Apr 1 
Apr 2 

Synaptic transmission 
QUIZ:  covering Section 2 
No tutorial (Holiday) 

Apr 6 
Apr 8 
Apr 9 

Synaptic plasticity I 
Synaptic plasticity II 
Tutorial 11 

 

 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 
 

Course Materials 

●  No formal text is required for this course.  
●  Assigned readings will include original journal articles and possibly review articles. 
●  References for the assigned readings will be posted on Avenue 2 weeks before they are 

discussed in tutorial.   

○  Assigned readings for Tutorial 1 will be posted on the first day of class, 8 days before the 

tutorial presentation/discussion. 

●  Assigned articles that are not accessible through the university library system will be posted on 

Avenue. 

●  As copyright law applies to all resources posted on or linked from Avenue, students may not 

disseminate these materials to individuals not enrolled in this course.  

Course Evaluation 

Biology 4T03: 

●  Tutorial presentation (~ 30 minutes) of assigned original article    
 
●  Quiz 1 (~ 1 hour, in class), covering material of first half   
  
●  Quiz 2 (~ 1 hour, in class), covering material of second half 
 
●  Participation in group discussion 
●  There is no formal final examination. 
●  No makeup examinations or tutorial presentations will be permitted. Consideration will be given 

30% 
30% 
30% 
10% 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

with a doctor’s note only, and only for redistribution of the mark. 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 
 
 

Biology 6T03: 

●  Grading scheme as outlined above for Biology 4T03  
●  Essay on instructor-approved topic in molecular/cellular neuroscience 

 

 

 
 

50% 
50% 

○  Essay topic must be approved by Thursday, Feb 11, 2021 
○  Essays are due on Thursday, Apr 8, 2021, at 7:00pm (on Avenue, unless alternative prior 

arrangements have been made with the appropriate instructor) 

○  Consult appropriate instructor for formatting guidelines 
○  Late submissions will be assessed a 10% penalty for each day (or fraction thereof) late 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 
“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

4 

 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for 
more information. 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous  
or Spiritual Observances (RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

