 

MOLBIO4DD3 
Molecular Evolution 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 

Course Details 

 
Instructor: Ben Evans, evansb@mcmaster.ca, 905-525-9140x26973 
 
Lab/TA’s: To be announced. 
  
Lectures: Tu, Th, 11:30-12:20 BSB B154 
  
Lab/Tutorial: Mo, 11:30-12:20 HH217 
  

Course Description and Learning Objectives 

MOLBIO4DD3 will explore how molecules change over time within and between species. We will 
examine principles of molecular evolution and their application to conservation biology, evolutionary 
ecology, forensic biology, genomics, sex chromosomes, phylogenetics, and behavioural ecology. 
 
We have entered the “post-genomic” era, and “big data” approaches are becoming commonplace tools 
for biological research, biotechnology, and healthcare.  The course begins with an exploration of how we 
can use forensic techniques and molecular data to gain insights into behavioral ecology. This will lead to 
discussion of alternative explanations for molecular polymorphism, including the neutral theory of 
molecular evolution. The role of gene duplication and natural selection in genome evolution will be 
explored as will the impact of sex and recombination on genome evolution, chromosomal evolution, and 
natural selection.  
 
Interesting fact(s) or questions(s) 
Fundamental questions to be asked (and answered!) include: Can molecules tell time? Is one codon 
better than another? How does one measure genetic distance? Where do new genes come from? Are 
gene duplicates really redundant and if so, why do they persist? How are genomes organized? What is 
the genomic impact of sex with Neanderthals? 
 
A part of the course will be devoted to “case studies” of individual examples of molecular change and 
how they have been used to study the origin of life, to study the origin of mitochondria, to study HIV 
viral evolution, to study the evolution of sex determination, to study the historical movements of early 
humans.  
 
Preparation: 
Prerequisites are either Anthro 2D03 or Biology 3FF3 

 

 

 

 

1 

 

Course Learning Objectives 

All biological processes originate from an ancestral form and are sculpted over time by evolution. This 
course will provide students with unique insights into:  

•  How molecular evolution shapes biological diversity and biological processes 
•  How an understanding of molecular evolution can be leveraged towards understanding 

fundamental aspects of our world such as biological diversity, disease outbreaks, and biological 
novelty 

•  How sex chromosomes originate and evolve 
•  How natural selection influences genomic variation and how we can test for this influence 
•  How humans evolved and interacted with other populations such as Neanderthals 
•  How to estimate and interpret evolutionary relationships among species 
•  How lateral gene transfer influences microbial genomes 
•  How transposible elements evolve 
•  How we can understand which genes influence phenotypic variation 

 
 By the end of this course students will be able to: 

•  Critically evaluate peer reviewed papers on molecular evolution 
•  Understand and interpret methodology in genomics, bioinformatics, and phylogenetics 
•  Understand the effects of different types of natural selection on genomic variation 
•  Understand how recombination influences the efficacy of natural selection 
•  Communicate complex topics in Molecular Evolution 

 

 

Course Schedule and Format 

 
Lectures and tutorials are currently scheduled to meet in person at the times and places listed above. In 
the event the winter term is changed to be online, we will hold lectures and tutorials online at the 
schedule times.  In the event of an online offering, all class meetings will be recorded and posted with 
closed captions.  If students do not want to be visible during recordings, they should keep their cameras 
off. However, for tutorial presentations, students are especially encouraged to use video. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 
opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

Course Materials 

 
No textbooks are assigned for this course; all material will be peer reviewed papers that will be posted 
on Avenue. 
  

Course Evaluation 

Two mid-term exams will test concepts from the first and second thirds of the course respectively. The 
final focus in part on the final third but also the rest of the course and therefore WILL be cumulative. 
 
Problem sets will be due electronically before the tutorial each week by email to the TA. No late 
problem sets will be accepted. The problem set portion of your grade will be based on the best 8 
problem sets that you hand in out of a total of 9 or 10 problem sets that will be assigned in total. In 
tutorials, students will discuss answers to the problem sets that were due that day with the guidance of 
the teaching assistant.  Student groups will be required to present paper(s), lead discussions including 
relevant background information, and ask questions.  
 

 
Mid-term 1 (ﬁfty minutes) 
 
Mid-term 2 (ﬁfty minutes)  
Problem sets 
 
 
Tutorial Presentation, Questions, and Attendance  
 
 
Final Exam (2 hours) 

  
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

25%  
25%  
5%  
15% 
30%  

 
In the event of a mandated change to an online offering, this course may use online proctoring software 
for tests and exams. This software may require students to turn on their video camera, present 
identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other 
applications/software during tests or exams. This software may be required to be installed before the 
test/exam begins. 
 
 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 

Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in 
unearned academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the 
grade of zero on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: 
“Grade of F assigned for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. 
For information on the various types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity 
Policy, located at https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 

● 

improper collaboration in group work. 

●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their 
work electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to 
Learn, etc.) using plagiarism detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for 
academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does 
not submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal 
verification that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other 
software, etc.). For more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to 
www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they 
access the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and 
last names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become 
apparent to all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the 
technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this 
disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the 
course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require 
students to turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 

 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

6 

