 

BIOLOGY 2D03 

PLANT BIODIVERSITY & BIOTECHNOLOGY 
Winter 2020 Course Outline 
 

Course Details 

        Office: LSB 225.  Ext: 24004 

   Office: LSB 529.  Ext: 26345  
   Dr. Susan Dudley, sdudley@mcmaster.ca  

 
Instructors: Dr. Robin Cameron, rcamero@mcmaster.ca 
 
 
 
Office hours: TBA 
  
Course Coordinator: Alastair Tracey, bioyr2@mcmaster.ca 
                                 Office: LSB 119 
 
 Lab/TA’s: TBA 
  
Lectures: Tuesday, Thursday, Fridays at 11:30 am – 12:20 pm, Location to be Determined 
  
Lab: Tue, Wed, Thu, Fri 8:30 – 11:30 am and 2:30 – 5:30 pm in LSB 105 
 

Course Description 

Key concepts in plant biology and biodiversity will be explored, including the origin of plants, plant structure 
and development, plant genomes, plant responses to the environment and other organisms, agriculture and 
plant biotechnology. 
Three lectures, one lab (three hours); one term 
Prerequisite(s): BIOLOGY 1A03, 1M03; or ISCI 1A24 A/B. If not already completed, BIOSAFE 1BS0 (or HTHSCI 
1BS0) must be done prior to the first lab. 

Course Learning Objectives 

By the end of the course students will: 

•  Obtain an introductory understanding of many aspects of plant biology, including genomics, anatomy, 

cell structure/function, development, reproduction and physiology. 
•  Use this fundamental knowledge to explore how plants live their lives by: 

responding to the abiotic environment (drought, floods, cold, etc) 
interacting with beneficial organisms (pollinators, symbiotic microbes) 

-  obtaining energy and information from light for growth and reproduction 
- 
- 
-  defending themselves from pests (pathogens, insects, etc). 
•  Obtain introductory knowledge of traditional and modern agriculture. 
•  Examine how scientists apply fundamental knowledge of plant biology to improve agriculture 
• 

Learn about the pros and cons of genetically modified crops and be able to form an opinion: Do the 
benefits outweigh the risks or the risks outweigh the benefits? 

•  Obtain plant biology-associated lab skills including microscopy and serial dilutions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

 
OVERARCHING GOALS: To demonstrate: i) the importance of plants for people and the planet, ii) that plants 
are fascinating and iii) plant research, both fundamental and applied, is key to solving numerous problems 
facing our planet. 

 

Course Schedule 

 

Week of 

Lecture 1 
 

Lecture 2 
 

Lecture 3 
 

Lecture 5 
 

Lecture 6 
 

LECTURE SCHEDULE 

Topic 
Introduction to course 
Origin of Plants - evolution of 
photosynthesis, eukaryotic cells, land & 
seed plants, angiosperms 

Lab Topic 

LAB SCHEDULE 
Lab Exercises 

No labs 

Plant Genomes 

Lab 1: Origin of 
Plants 

Meet in lab, accompany TA to 
greenhouse, Scavenger Hunt I. 

Plant Cells 
(importance of cell wall, vacuole, cuticle, 
plasmodesmata) 

Lab 2: Seedlings 

Fern spore germination (to be 
observed all term). 
Cauliflower tissue culture.  

Lecture 4 

Development in Angiosperms 
(embryogenesis to plant sex) 

Lab 3: Plant organs I 
-roots and shoots 

Sectioning and staining of different 
plant organs. 

Plant plumbing & nutrition 
Online Midterm, early February,  
covers Lectures 1 to 4 (20%) 
Plant responses I  
Perception of Light -seed germination, 
shade avoidance 
Perception of Hormones – Ethylene, 
ABA & GA signal transduction 

Lab 4: Plant organs II 
-leaves and flowers 

Protoplast Isolation. 

Lab 5: Reproduction, 
Seeds, fruits  
Life cycles  

Lab Test 1 covers labs 1 to 4 (10%) 

Feb 15-19  Mid-term Recess 

 No labs 

 

Lecture 7 
 

Plant Responses II - Environmental 
Stress 

Lab 6: Light & 
hormone responses 

Lecture 8  
 

Plant Responses III – Biotic Interactions, 
plant immunity & disease, symbiotic 
interactions 

Lab 7: 
Environmental 
Responses 

Photosynthesis exercise. 
Seed germination response to 
hormones. 
Effect of hormones on tissue 
regeneration in tissue culture. 

Hrp exercise- inoculate bacteria 
into leaves. 

 

 

2 

Lecture 9 
 

Lecture 10 
 

Lecture 11 
 

Lecture 12 

Domestication & Agriculture 

Biotechnology I – current GM crops in 
Canada, ethical issues, organic vs 
conventional farming 
 
Biotechnology II –GM crops in 
developing world, plants as factories, 
future GM crops 
 
Plant Ecology – Dr. Susan Dudley 
 

Lecture 13 

Finish and Review 

Lab 8: Biotic 
Interactions 

Lab 9: Discussions  

Lab 10: Agriculture 
Greenhouse 
Scavenger Hunt II 
 

 

 

Hrp exercise – collect leaves & 
bacteria, plate serial dilutions. 
PCR of GMO food products. 
Hrp Exercise - review Hrp images, 
produce a class chart; discuss Hrp  
and PCR results. 

Agriculture and wood exercise, 
then accompany TA to greenhouse 
for Scavenger Hunt II 

Lab Test 2 covers labs 5 to 10 (10%) 

 
Laboratories for Biology 2D03 
Labs are every week! Students must attend the lab section they have been assigned to.   
In the event of university closure due to a storm, make-up labs will be attempted as soon as possible. 

 

The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term.  The 
university may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances.  If either type 
of modification becomes necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with 
explanation and the opportunity to comment on changes.  It is the responsibility of the student to check their 
McMaster email and course A2L webpage weekly during the term and to note any changes. 
 
Lab Expectations 
Students work in pairs but complete the weekly lab assignments individually. 
Students are expected to clean up their work area at the end of each lab by: 

  Unplugging microscopes, wrapping the cords around them and putting the dust cover on. 
  Returning all prepared slides to the appropriate slide boxes on the center and back benches. 
  Disposing of their waste in the appropriate containers. 

 
LAB SUPPLIES – Students should bring to each lab (no loaners available) 

  Lab coat (available at the bookstore) 
  Lab manual (printed from Avenue)  
  Pens, pencils, coloured pencils or markers 
  Digital imaging device. Students are permitted to use digital cameras or other digital imaging devices in 

the Biology 2D03 labs.  These devices are not required laboratory supplies. Students can obtain 
equally good lab notes (and marks) by making their own hand drawn diagrams during the labs. If you 
elect to use a digital imaging device, read the policy regarding their use (outlined in the lab manual) 
carefully. The use of such devices is a privilege and may be withdrawn if the policy is not followed. 

 

 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university may 
change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes necessary, 
reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the opportunity to comment 
on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and course websites weekly during the 

3 

term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through regular 
McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster email. 

 

Course Materials 

 
Recommended Textbook: Plant Biology, Smith A.M., G. Coupland, L. Dolan, N. Harberd, J. Jones, C. Martin, R. 
Sablowski & A. Amey.  Garland Science, NY, NY.  
Available at McMaster University Campus Store, the McMaster University bookstore (used and new copies) 
13:978-0-8153-4025-6 
An e-book version is available directly from the publisher 9781136977459 or Amazon.ca ASIN B008ZJKUZ8   
A copy of the text is available on reserve at the Thode Library 
 
May be of interest: When is a flower not a flower? and other intriguing questions about plants, Larry and & 
Carol Peterson. Available online at www.petersonbook.com for $25. 
 
Lab Manual: Chapters will be posted weekly to Avenue to Learn 
  

Course Evaluation 

 

  

Grading Schemes 
Laboratory Practical Test 1 
Laboratory Practical Test 2 
Laboratory Practical Test Make-up 
Midterm (in class) 
Lab Assignments 
Final Exam (cumulative) 
TOTAL 

 

1 
10 
10 
0 
20 
15 
45 
100 

2 
10 
10 
0 
0 
15 
65 
100 

3 
0 
10 
10 
20 
15 
45 
100 

4 
0 
10 
10 
0 
15 
65 
100 

6 
0 
0 
20 
0 
15 
65 

8 
5 
10 
0 
0 
0 
10 
20 
0 
20 
15 
15 
45 
65 
100  100  100  100 

7 
10 
0 
10 
20 
15 
45 

 
EXPLANATION OF GRADING PROCEDURES USED IN BIOLOGY 2D03 
 

A.  Final Exam (45% or 65%) A copy of a past final exam will be posted to A2L under Content.  
B.  Laboratory Practical Tests (20%) - The practical tests will be held in lab. Lab Test 1 will take place the 
second week of February, Lab Test 2, the last week of March. Lab Practical Tests provide you the 
opportunity to review and check your understanding of laboratory and related lecture material. 
Practice questions will be provided before each Lab Practical Test. If you miss Lab Test 1 or Lab Test 2, 
you will write a Lab Test Make-up for the Lab Test you missed during early April.  If you miss both Lab 
Test 1 & 2, you will write a Lab Test Make-up that will cover both Lab Test 1 & 2 during early April. 

C.  Midterm (20%), will cover LECTURE material. The Midterm will be held in class in early February. 

Practice Midterm questions and answers will be posted to A2L under Content. If you don’t write the 
Midterm, your exam will be worth 65%. We strongly encourage you to write the Midterm to practice 
for the exam. If you do poorly on the Midterm you will not be penalized and instead will receive 
Grading Scheme 2, 4, 6 or 8 in which the 20% Midterm will be transferred to the Final Exam. 

D.  Lab Assignments (15%) A small assignment will be completed by each student and submitted to your 

TA by the end of each lab. 

Students who fail to clean up their work area at the end of each lab will have marks deducted from the lab 
assignment component of their grade. 

 

 

 

 

4 

 

 

 

Academic Integrity 

You are expected to exhibit honesty and use ethical behaviour in all aspects of the learning process. 
Academic credentials you earn are rooted in principles of honesty and academic integrity. It is your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero on 
an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned for 
academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. For information on the various 
types of academic dishonesty please refer to the Academic Integrity Policy, located at 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

●  plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

obtained. 
improper collaboration in group work. 

● 
●  copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

Some courses may use a web-based service (Turnitin.com) to reveal authenticity and ownership of student 
submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their work electronically 
either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to Learn, etc.) using plagiarism 
detection (a service supported by Turnitin.com) so it can be checked for academic dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must inform 
the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not submit 
work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal verification that standards 
of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For more details about 
McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

Some courses may use on-line elements (e.g. e-mail, Avenue to Learn, LearnLink, web pages, capa, Moodle, 
Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they access the electronic 
components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and last names, user names for 
the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to all other students in the same 
course. The available information is dependent on the technology used. Continuation in a course that uses on-
line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have any questions or concerns about such 
disclosure please discuss this with the course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

Some courses may use online proctoring software for tests and exams. This software may require students to 
turn on their video camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. 
This software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, respectful 
and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These expectations are 
described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students share the responsibility 
of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth of all McMaster community 
members, whether in person or online. 

 

It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in virtual 
learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or interfere with 
reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that interfere with university 
functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, Microsoft Teams or Zoom for 
delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes may include restriction or removal of 
the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility Services 
(SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program Coordinator. For 
further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 
policy. 
 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, students 
should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests for Relief for 
Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 
For Biology 2D03 you should list Mihaela Georgescu (mgeorg@mcmaster.ca) as the course contact. 
Immediately after using the online tool, students MUST contact Mihaela Georgescu regarding the nature of 
the relief. Failure to do so may negate the opportunity for relief. 
 
Additional Information on Missed Work in Biology 2D03: 
NOTE: To receive credit for completing Biology 2D03, students must complete a majority of the labs and course 
tests. An MSAF does NOT exempt students from completing the course lab or test requirements. If a student 
misses more than 75%1 of the labs and/or test components, credit in Biology 2D03 may NOT be given. This 
applies even if the absences from the labs or tests are validated by AN MSAF AND the student has a passing 
grade for the portion of the course the student has completed.   
 

                                                
1 Note: 75% refers to completion of 75% of the term work, NOT achieving a grade of 75% on the term material! 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6 

 

Missed Midterm: If you miss the Midterm, contact Mihaela Georgescu as soon as 
possible after submitting the MSAF. The weight of the Midterm (20%) will be added to that of your final exam 
(Grading Scheme 2, 4 or 6). 
 
Missed Labs or Lab Practical Test: Please contact Mihaela Georgescu (mgeorg@mcmaster.ca) as soon as 
possible after submitting the MSAF. If you miss a lab every effort will be made to put you into a later lab slot in 
the same week.  If you MSAF one of the Lab Tests the 10% will be reweighted to the other Lab Test.  If you do 
not hand in a lab assignment but submit an MSAF or can provide a valid reason that is approved by the 
Associate Dean of Science Office, your accommodation will be a 48 hour extension from the lab assignment 
due date, regardless  of when the MSAF was submitted. 
 

Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances (RISO) 

Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances should 
follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their Faculty Office 
normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need for accommodation 
or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact their instructors as soon as 
possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law protect 
every original literary, dramatic, musical and artistic work, including lectures by University instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. Recording may 
be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a student for the purpose of 
personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may be recorded by others during the 
class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through regular 
McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster email. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

