BIOLOGY 2EE3 
Introduction to Microbiology and Biotechnology 
Winter 2021 Course Outline 

Course Details 

 

 
INSTRUCTOR: 
OFFICE HOURS: 

 

 

  
LAB TAs:  
 
LECTURES: 
 
LABORATORIES: 
 

 

 

Dr. Turlough Finan, LSB-537 (finan@mcmaster.ca) 
Location/platform, day, and time to be determined.  Appointments can 
be made by contacting Dr. Finan 

COURSE AND LAB COORDINATOR: Alastair Tracey, LSB-119 (bioyr2@mcmaster.ca) 

To be determined (TBD). 

Mondays and Thursdays, 12:30-1:20, Tuesdays 1:30-2:20, location TBD. 
 
Monday to Thursday, 8:30-11:20 or 2:30-5:20 in LSB 104 

Course Description 

 
Microbial structure, genetics, metabolism, and evolution. Overview of agricultural, medical, 
environmental, and industrial microbiology. Covers key concepts, fundamental principles, and common 
research tools in microbiology 
Prerequisite(s): ISCI 1A24, or Biology 1A03, Biology 1M03, Chemistry 1A03, Chemistry 1AA3, or 
registration in Level III Chem Engineering and Bioengineering. If not already completed, BIOSAFE 1BS0 
(or HTHSCI 1BS0) must be completed prior to the first lab. 
 
The course will be delivered via live lectures and in-person laboratory activities. The midterm test will  
occur in the evening outside of scheduled lecture time. Laboratories will occur during the term as  
scheduled and seen in each student’s Mosaic timetable.  
 

Course Learning Objectives 

 
By the end of this course students will: 
 
1.  Have a broad fundamental knowledge and appreciation of microbiological concepts and applications. 

2.  Be able to distinguish key differences between major groups of microorganisms. 
 

1 of 8 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
3.  Have a basic understanding of the structure, physiology, biochemistry and genetics of microorganisms. 
 
4.  Have a basic understanding of the evolution of microorganisms. 
 
5.  Understand the importance of microorganisms in the environment and in agriculture, medicine and 

6.  Be  able  to  use  basic  microbiology  lab  equipment  and  perform  microbiological  lab  techniques 

 
7.  Be able to interpret and analyse laboratory results and produce written reports on experiments and 

industry.  
 

aseptically. 

observations. 
 

8.  Be prepared for upper-level courses on more advanced microbiological topics and/or experimentation. 
 

 

 

Course Schedule 

 
IMPORTANT DATES:  

Jan. 6  
Jan. 7 
Jan. 11-15  
Jan. 18-22  
Feb. 15-21  
Feb. 23 
Apr. 8 
Apr. 9  

Classes begin 
First Bio 2EE3 lecture 
Lab 1 for ODD numbered lab sections 
Lab 1 for EVEN numbered lab sections 
Reading Week 
Midterm exam 
Last Bio 2EE3 lecture 
Classes end 

LECTURE TOPICS 

This course provides students with a broad overview of microbiology and an understanding of the key 
concepts,  fundamental  principles,  and  common  research  tools  in  microbiology.  The  topics  include  the 
history and scope of microbiology, the fundamentals of microbial cell biology, cell structure, reproduction, 
genetics, metabolism, ecology, evolution, diversity, systematics, genomics, and overviews of the applied 
fields  in  agricultural,  medical,  environmental  and  industrial  microbiology.  This  course  also  prepares 
students for more advanced courses offered at the third and fourth-year levels, e.g. Microbial Genetics 
(MolBiol 3O03), Techniques in Molecular Genetics (MolBiol 3V03), Microbial Diversity & Environmental 
Biotechnology (Bio 4PP3), and Medical Microbiology (MolBiol 4P03). These courses systematically build 
knowledge in all areas of modern microbiology.  

2 of 8 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

LAB DETAILS 

 

 
The laboratory periods are mandatory and are intended to familiarize students with the important basic 
methods  used  by  microbiologists  and  essentially  all  molecular  biologists.  The  main  methods  include 
aseptic  techniques, 
isolation  of  specific  microorganisms  from  mixed  populations,  microscopic 
examination of microorganisms, microbial physiology, the polymerase chain reaction, gel electrophoresis, 
DNA sequence analyses, and yeast fermentation. The laboratory manuals will be posted as PDF files on 
the course’s Avenue website for downloading and printing. Completion of the labs and lab reports is a 
requirement for passing the course. 

 
LAB SCHEDULE: Biology 2EE3 labs will not occur during the week of January 4 – 8. 
 

DATES 
Week of Jan. 11: ODD# 
Week of Jan. 18: EVEN# 
Week of Jan. 25: ODD# 
Week of Feb. 1: EVEN# 
Week of Feb. 8: ODD# 

 
Week of Feb. 15-19 

LAB 
Lab 1 

Lab 2 

Lab 3 

TOPIC 
Identifying bacteria by traditional 
means 
Working with viruses 

ASSESSMENT 
Informal report  

Informal report 

Conjugation and antibiotic resistance 

Formal lab report 

 

MIDTERM RECESS 

Week of Feb. 22: EVEN# 

Lab 3 

Conjugation and antibiotic resistance 

Formal lab report 

Week of Mar. 1: EVEN # 
Week of Mar. 8: ODD# 
Week of Mar. 15: EVEN# 
Week of Mar. 22: ODD# 

Lab 4 

Lab 5 

Fermentation, identification by 
molecular means 
DNA gel electrophoresis 

Informal report 

 
Please check your schedule to ensure that you know which lab room your section is assigned to. 
Students must attend the lab section to which they have been assigned. Those with ACADEMIC 
CONFLICTS ONLY should arrange their own lab change through Mosaic prior to the add/drop date. It is 
your responsibility to attend the correct lab section and room. NOTE: If you are absent from your lab, 
you may not attend another lab section without previously contacting the course coordinator. If you 
cannot attend another lab section, you will be required to submit an MSAF.   
 
In the event of a storm closure check Avenue to Learn for alternate arrangements for those lab sections.  
Specific information may be sent to your McMaster email address. NO OTHER EMAIL ADDRESSES WILL 
BE USED. 
 
IMPORTANT NOTE 
The instructor and university reserve the right to modify elements of the course during the term. The university 
may change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme circumstances. If any modification becomes 
necessary, reasonable notice and communication with the students will be given with explanation and the 

 

 
 

3 of 8 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

opportunity to comment on changes. It is the responsibility of the student to check their McMaster email and 
course websites weekly during the term and to note any changes.  Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or McMaster 
email. 

Course Materials 

 
RECOMMENDED TEXTBOOK:  Wessner, Dupont and Charles (2013). Microbiology. John Wiley & Sons. 
ISBN 978-0-471-69434-2 or Wessner, Dupont, Charles and Neufeld (2016). Microbiology 2nd edition. John 
Wiley  &  Sons.    Etext  ISBN  9781119320661  or  loose-leaf  text  ISBN  9781119498551 available  via  The 
Campus Store. 
  
Lab manuals for each lab will be made available on Avenue to Learn and must be brought to the lab.  

Course Evaluation 

Informal laboratory reports (see the lab details for a detailed breakdown) 
Formal laboratory report (see the lab details for a detailed breakdown) 
Laboratory notebook and participation  
Final Exam; exam is cumulative  

30%  Midterm exam (Tuesday, February 23, 7:00 pm to 9:00 pm) 
12% 
10% 
  3% 
45% 

The Biology 2EE3 final grades will be calculated based upon the following course assessments: 
 
MARKS: 
 
 
 
 
 
If the midterm and final exam cannot be administered in-person, the course may use online proctoring 
software for the midterm and final exam. This software may require students to turn on their video 
camera, present identification, monitor and record their computer activities, and/or lock/restrict their 
browser or other applications/software during midterms or final exams. This software may be required 
to be installed before the midterm/final exam begins. 
  
Please discuss any uncertainties about term grades with the Course Coordinator before the final exam is 
written.  Final  grades  obtained  for  2EE3  will  be  converted  according  to  the  scheme  used  at McMaster 
University. 

 

 
 

 
 

A+ 
A 
A- 
B+ 
B 
B- 

C+ 

12 
11 
10 
9 
8 
7 

6 

63-66% 
60-62% 
57-59% 
53-56% 
50-52% 
0-49% 
 

C 
C- 
D+ 
D 
D- 
F 
 

5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 
 

90-100% 
85-89% 
80-84% 
77-79% 
73-76% 
70-72% 

67-69% 

 

4 of 8 

 

 

 

 

 

Requests for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work 

 
POLICY REGARDING MISSED WORK IN THE FACULTY OF SCIENCE 
 
McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF): In the event of an absence for medical or other reasons, 
students should review and follow the Academic Regulation in the Undergraduate Calendar “Requests 
for Relief for Missed Academic Term Work”. 
 
View the McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF) for more information. 
 
Undergraduate students who have missed academic work resulting from a medical or personal situation, 
lasting  up  to  3  calendar  days,  may  request  relief,  once  per  term,  without  documentation,  using  the 
McMaster Student Absence Form (MSAF). Absences for a longer duration or for other reasons must be 
reported  to  your  Faculty/Program  office,  with  documentation,  and  relief  from  term  work  may  not 
necessarily  be  granted.  When  using  the  MSAF,  please  put  Alastair  Tracey  as  the  contact  email 
(bioyr2@mcmaster.ca).  Please note that the MSAF may not be used for term work worth 25% or more, 
nor can it be used for the final examination. 
 
POLICY ON LATE LAB REPORTS 
Lab reports are due at 2:30 pm, on their respective deadlines after you performed the lab exercises. Lab 
reports must be submitted in hard copy to the correct Bio 2EE3 dropbox on the first floor of LSB (near the 
elevators). It is your responsibility to ensure they are placed in the correct dropbox. Reports received after 
the deadline or found later in the wrong dropbox, will be penalized at 10% per day. If a MSAF is provided, 
students will receive a 2-day extension on the due date of the lab report. IMPORTANT NOTE – Students 
MUST complete ALL of the lab components to receive credit for Biology 2EE3. 

 
POLICY ON MISSED TESTS 
The weight of a missed midterm will be added to the value of the final exam if a MSAF is provided. 
Missing the midterm without a MSAF will receive a grade of zero.   
 

Academic Integrity 

 
Attention  is  drawn  to  the  Statement  on  Academic  Ethics  and  the  Senate  Resolutions  on  Academic 
Dishonesty as found in the Senate Policy Statements distributed at registration and available in the Senate 
Office.  Any student who infringes any one of these resolutions will be treated according to published 
policy. 
 
You  are  expected  to  exhibit  honesty  and  use  ethical  behaviour  in  all  aspects  of  the  learning  process. 
Academic  credentials  you  earn  are  rooted  in  principles  of  honesty  and  academic  integrity.  It  is  your 
responsibility to understand what constitutes academic dishonesty. 
 

5 of 8 

 

 
 

 
Academic dishonesty is to knowingly act or fail to act in a way that results or could result in unearned 
academic credit or advantage. This behaviour can result in serious consequences, e.g. the grade of zero 
on an assignment, loss of credit with a notation on the transcript (notation reads: “Grade of F assigned 
for academic dishonesty”), and/or suspension or expulsion from the university. For information on the 
various  types  of  academic  dishonesty  please  refer  to  the  Academic  Integrity  Policy,  located  at 
https://secretariat.mcmaster.ca/university-policies-procedures- guidelines/ 
 
The following illustrates only three forms of academic dishonesty: 

1.  Plagiarism, e.g. the submission of work that is not one’s own or for which other credit has been 

2. 

obtained.  
Improper collaboration in group work.  While students may find it helpful to discuss assignments 
with each other, it is not acceptable to prepare common answers.  Where laboratories require 
you to work in groups the data obtained will be all the same, but your treatment of it (tables, 
graphs,  Results  &  Discussion)  must  be  your  own  individual  work.  Your  answers  to  theory 
questions, results & discussion & computer derived graphs should be your own.  For example, 
you and your lab partner(s) cannot print/insert 2 to 4 versions of the same graph(s) in your lab 
reports  even  though  you  are  working  with  the  same  data.  Each  student  must  create  and 
print/insert their own versions of the graphs in biology labs even though their data is the same 
as their lab partners. 

3.  Copying or using unauthorized aids in tests and examinations. 

Authenticity/Plagiarism Detection 

 
Some  courses  may  use  a  web-based  service  (Turnitin.com)  to  reveal  authenticity  and  ownership  of 
student submitted work. For courses using such software, students will be expected to submit their work 
electronically either directly to Turnitin.com or via an online learning platform (e.g. Avenue to Learn, etc.) 
using  plagiarism  detection  (a  service  supported  by  Turnitin.com)  so  it  can  be  checked  for  academic 
dishonesty. 
  
Students who do not wish their work to be submitted through the plagiarism detection software must 
inform the Instructor before the assignment is due. No penalty will be assigned to a student who does not 
submit work to the plagiarism detection software. All submitted work is subject to normal verification 
that standards of academic integrity have been upheld (e.g., on-line search, other software, etc.). For 
more details about McMaster’s use of Turnitin.com please go to www.mcmaster.ca/academicintegrity. 
 

Courses with an On-line Element 

 
Some  courses  may  use  on-line  elements  (e.g.  e-mail,  Avenue  to  Learn,  LearnLink,  web  pages,  capa, 
Moodle, Echo360, Microsoft Teams, ThinkingCap, etc.). Students should be aware that, when they access 
the electronic components of a course using these elements, private information such as first and last 
names, user names for the McMaster e-mail accounts, and program affiliation may become apparent to 
all other students in the same course. The available information is dependent on the technology used. 

 

 

 

 

6 of 8 

 

 
 

 
Continuation in a course that uses on-line elements will be deemed consent to this disclosure. If you have 
any questions or concerns about such disclosure please discuss this with the course instructor. 
 

Online Proctoring 

 
Some  courses  may  use  online  proctoring  software  for  tests  and  exams.  This  software  may  require 
students  to  turn  on  their  video  camera,  present  identification,  monitor  and  record  their  computer 
activities, and/or lock/restrict their browser or other applications/software during tests or exams. This 
software may be required to be installed before the test/exam begins. 
 

Conduct Expectations 

As a McMaster student, you have the right to experience, and the responsibility to demonstrate, 
respectful and dignified interactions within all of our living, learning and working communities. These 
expectations are described in the Code of Student Rights & Responsibilities (the “Code”). All students 
share the responsibility of maintaining a positive environment for the academic and personal growth 
of all McMaster community members, whether in person or online. 

 
It is essential that students be mindful of their interactions online, as the Code remains in effect in 
virtual learning environments. The Code applies to any interactions that adversely affect, disrupt, or 
interfere with reasonable participation in University activities. Student disruptions or behaviours that 
interfere with university functions on online platforms (e.g. use of Avenue 2 Learn, WebEx, Echo360, 
Microsoft Teams or Zoom for delivery), will be taken very seriously and will be investigated. Outcomes 
may include restriction or removal of the involved students’ access to these platforms. 
 

Academic Accommodation of Students with Disabilities 

 
Students with disabilities who require academic accommodation must contact Student Accessibility 
Services (SAS) at 905-525-9140 ext. 28652 or sas@mcmaster.ca to make arrangements with a Program 
Coordinator. For further information, consult McMaster University’s Academic Accommodation of 
Students with Disabilities policy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

7 of 8 

 
Academic Accommodation for Religious, Indigenous or Spiritual Observances 
(RISO) 

 
Students requiring academic accommodation based on religious, indigenous or spiritual observances 
should follow the procedures set out in the RISO policy. Students should submit their request to their 
Faculty Office normally within 10 working days of the beginning of term in which they anticipate a need 
for accommodation or to the Registrar's Office prior to their examinations. Students should also contact 
their instructors as soon as possible to make alternative arrangements for classes, assignments, and 
tests. 
 

Copyright and Recording 

Students are advised that lectures, demonstrations, performances, and any other course material 
provided by an instructor include copyright protected works. The Copyright Act and copyright law 
protect every original literary, dramatic, musical, and artistic work, including lectures by University 
instructors 
 
The recording of lectures, tutorials, or other methods of instruction may occur during a course. 
Recording may be done by either the instructor for the purpose of authorized distribution, or by a 
student for the purpose of personal study. Students should be aware that their voice and/or image may 
be recorded by others during the class. Please speak with the instructor if this is a concern for you. 
 

Extreme Circumstances 

 
The University reserves the right to change the dates and deadlines for any or all courses in extreme 
circumstances (e.g., severe weather, labour disruptions, etc.). Changes will be communicated through 
regular McMaster communication channels, such as McMaster Daily News, Avenue to Learn and/or 
McMaster email. 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

8 of 8 

 

 
 

